Cover




                      title:   100 Ways to Motivate Yourself :
                               Change Your Life Forever
                    author:    Chandler, Steve.
                 publisher:    The Career Press
              isbn10 | asin:   1564145190
              print isbn13:    9781564145192
             ebook isbn13:     9780585415680
                 language:     English
                   subject     Motivation (Psychology) ,
                               Self-actualization (Psychology)
          publication date:    2001
                        lcc:   BF503.C48 2001eb
                       ddc:    158.1
                   subject:    Motivation (Psychology) ,
                               Self-actualization (Psychology)
                                cover

Page 1
100 Ways to Motivate Yourself
Revised Edition
Change Your Life Forever
                                page_1

Page 2
This page intentionally left blank.
                                 page_2

Page 3
100 Ways to Motivate Yourself
Revised Edition
Change Your Life Forever
Steve Chandler



                                page_3

Page 4
Copyright © 2001 by Steve Chandler
All rights reserved under the Pan-American and International Copyright
Conventions. This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, in
any form or by any means electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval
system now known or hereafter invented, without written permission
from the publisher, The Career Press.
100 WAYS TO MOTIVATE YOURSELF
Cover design by Cheryl Finbow
Edited by Robert M. Brink and Jodi Brandon
Typeset by Ellen S. Weitzenhofer
Printed in the U.S.A. by Book-mart Press
To order this title, please call toll-free 1-800-CAREER-1 (NJ and
Canada: 201-848-0310) to order using VISA or Master Card, or for
further information on books from Career Press.


The Career Press, Inc., 3 Tice Road, PO Box 687,
Franklin Lakes, NJ 07417
www.careerpress.com
  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Chandler, Steve, 1944-
  100 ways to motivate yourself : change your life forever / by
 Steve Chandler.—Rev. ed.
       p. cm.
  Includes index.
  ISBN 1-56414-519-0 (pbk.)
     1. Motivation (Psychology) 2. Self-actualization (Psychology) I.
 Title One hundred ways to motivate yourself. II. Title.
 BF503 .C48 2001
 158.1—dc21
                                               00-065106
                               page_4

Page 5
To Kathryn Anne Chandler
                                page_5

Page 6
Acknowledgments
To Robert Brink and Jodi Brandon for the masterful editing, to Lindsay
Brady for the ongoing perception of success, to Stephanie Chandler for
tirelessly working the cosmos, to Kathy for more than I can say, to Jim
Brannigan for the representation, to Fred Knipe for the music on New
Year's Eve, to Ron Fry for Career Press, to Karen Wolf for the
international distribution, to Nathaniel Branden for the psychology, to
Colin Wilson for the philosophy, to Arnold Schwarzenegger for a day to
remember, to Rett Nichols for the tension plan, to Graham Walsh for
the Tavern on the Green, to Terry Hill for the century's first real
mystery novel, to Cindy Chandler for the salvation, to Ed and Jeanne
for the Wrigley Mansion, to John Shade for the fire, to Scott Richardson
for the ideas, to Ann Coulter for the wake up calls, to Steven Forbes
Hardison for coaching and friendship beyond the earthly norm, and to
Dr. Deepak Chopra for unconcealing the creative intelligence that holds
us all together.
                     And to the memory of Art Hill:
                               without whom,
                             no life, no nothin'.
                                    page_6

Page 7
Contents
Preface: Cyber Motivation                                    11
Introduction: You have no personality                        15
100 Ways
1. Get on your deathbed                                      19
2. Stay hungry                                               21
3. Tell yourself a true lie                                  23
4. Keep your eyes on the prize                   24
5. Learn to sweat in peace                       25
6. Simplify your life                            27
7. Look for the lost gold                        31
8. Push all your own buttons                     33
9. Build a track record                          34
10. Welcome the unexpected                       35
11. Find your master key                         36
12. Put your library on wheels                   38
13. Definitely plan your work                    41
14. Bounce your thoughts                         42
15. Light your lazy dynamite                     44
16. Choose the happy few                         45
17. Learn to play a role                         47
18. Don't just do something...sit there          48
19. Use your brain chemicals                     50
20. Leave high school forever                    52
21. Learn to lose your cool                      54
22. Kill your television                         56
23. Break out of your soul cage                  57
24. Run your own plays                           58
                                   page_7

Page 8
25. Find your inner Einstein                60
26. Run toward your fear                    62
27. Create the way you relate               64
28. Try interactive listening               66
29. Embrace your will power                 67
30. Perform your little rituals             68
31. Find a place to come from               70
32. Be your own disciple                    71
33. Turn into a word processor              73
34. Program your biocomputer                73
35. Open your present                       75
36. Be a good detective                     76
37. Make a relation-shift                   78
38. Learn to come from behind               79
39. Come to your own rescue                 82
40. Find your soul purpose                  85
41. Get up on the right side                90
42. Let your whole brain play               91
43. Get your stars out                      93
44. Just make everything up              93
45. Put on your game face                96
46. Discover active relaxation           98
47. Make today a masterpiece             99
48. Enjoy all your problems              101
49. Remind your mind                     103
50. Get down and get small               106
51. Advertise to yourself                108
52. Think outside the box                111
53. Keep thinking, keep thinking         113
54. Put on a good debate                 117
55. Make trouble work for you            119
                                page_8

Page 9
56. Storm your own brain                 122
57. Keep changing your voice             124
58. Embrace the new frontier             126
59. Upgrade your old habits              128
60. Paint your masterpiece today         130
61. Swim laps underwater                 132
62. Bring on a good coach                133
63. Try to sell your home                138
64. Get your soul to talk                140
65. Promise the moon                     141
66. Make somebody's day                  142
67. Play the circle game                 143
68. Get up a game                        147
69. Turn your mother down                150
70. Face the sun                         150
71. Travel deep inside                   152
72. Go to war                            153
73. Use the 5% solution                  155
74. Do something badly                   157
75. Learn visioneering                   159
76. Lighten things up                    162
77. Serve and grow rich                  164
78. Make a list of your life             165
79. Set a specific power goal            168
80. Change yourself first                169
81. Pin your life down                   170
82. Take no for a question               172
83. Take the road to somewhere           174
84. Go on a news fast                                        175
85. Replace worry with action                                178
86. Run with the thinkers                                    181
                                  page_9

Page 10
87. Put more enjoyment in                                      182
88. Keep walking                                               184
89. Read more mysteries                                        186
90. Think your way up                                          188
91. Exploit your weakness                                      189
92. Try becoming the problem                                   191
93. Enlarge your objective                                     193
94. Give yourself flying lessons                               195
95. Hold your vision accountable                               197
96. Build your power base                                      199
97. Connect truth to beauty                                    200
98. Read yourself a story                                      202
99. Laugh for no reason                                        203
100. Walk with love and death                                  205
Afterword: Teach yourself the power of negative thinking       213
Index                                                          217
About the Author                                               223
                                 page_10

Page 11
Preface
Cyber Motivation
When this book was first written (in 1995), the entire world was not yet
living in cyberspace. The Internet was a relatively new idea, and very
few of us knew how big a part of our lives it would become.
As the new millennium dawned, a strange thing began to happen.
People everywhere were writing again, just as people did in the 1800s
when they took their quills out to write letters and diaries. The age of
mind-numbing television viewing had been eclipsed by the age of chat
rooms and e-mail.
This wonderful evolutionary jump in civilization gave this little book
that you are holding in your hands right now brand-new life. All of a
sudden the fight for limited shelf space in bookstores was not as
important to a book's success. What became most important was the
book's word-of-mouth "buzz" over the Internet.
Soon people were e-mailing other people about this book and the
Internet bookstores (with infinite shelf space) were selling copies as fast
as Career Press could print them. I began getting e-mails from readers
as far away as Taiwan and Japan and as close as my computer screen.
                                page_11

Page 12
When we leave this world, we will ask ourselves one question: What's
different? What's different because I was here? And the answer to that
question will be the difference that we made.
All of our thoughts and feelings won't matter any more when we are on
our deathbeds asking that question. What will matter is the action we
took and the difference that it made.
Yet we continue to obsess about our thoughts and become fascinated
with our feelings. We are offended by other people. We want to prove
we are right. We make other people wrong. We are disappointed in
some people and resent others. It goes on and on and none of it will
matter on that deathbed.
Action will be all that matters.
We could have made a difference every hour, every day, if we had
wanted to.
So how do we do that? How do we motivate ourselves to get into
action? How do we live a life of action and difference-making?
Aristotle knew the answer.
In the original preface to the original edition of this book, Aristotle gave
the answer. The answer lies in motion. The answer lies in movement.
So what follows is the original snow angel preface to the original edition
of the book. It's re-dedicated to everyone who has written to me about
it:
When I was a child growing up in Michigan, we used to make angels in
the snow.
We would find a fresh, untouched patch of snow and lie on our backs in
it. Then, flapping our arms, we'd leave the impression of wings in the
snow. We would then get up and admire our work. The two
                                  page_12

Page 13
movements, lying down and flapping our arms, created the angel.
This memory of Michigan in the winter has come back to me a lot in
recent weeks. It first happened when someone asked me what the
connection was between self-motivation and self-creation.
While answering the question, I got a picture of snow. I had a vision
that the whole universe was snow, and I could create myself any way I
wanted by my movement. The movement of the actions I took would
create the self I wanted to be.
Aristotle also knew how to create a self through movement.
He once said this: "Whatever we learn to do, we learn by actually doing
it; men come to be builders, for instance, by building, and harp players
by playing the harp. In the same way, by doing just acts we come to be
just: By doing self-controlled acts, we come to be self-controlled; and
by doing brave acts, we become brave."
This book contains 100 moves you can make in the snow.
Steve Chandler
Phoenix, Arizona
January, 2001
                                 page_13

Page 14
This page intentionally left blank.
                                 page_14

Page 15
Introduction
You Have No Personality
That each of us has a fixed personality is a myth. It is self-limiting and it
denies us our power of continuous creation.
In our ongoing creation of who we are, nothing has a greater impact on
that process than the choice we make between optimism and pessimism.
There are no optimistic or pessimistic personalities; there are only
single, individual choices for optimistic or pessimistic thoughts.
Charlie Chaplin once entered a "Charlie Chaplin Look-alike Contest" in
Monte Carlo and the judges awarded him third place!
Personality is overrated. Who we are is up to us every moment.
The choices we make for our thinking either motivate us or they do not.
And although clear visualization of a goal is a good first step, a joyfully
motivated life demands more. To live the life you want to live, action is
required. As Shakespeare said, "Action is eloquence." And as
psychologist and author Dr. Nathaniel
                                 page_15

Page 16
Branden has written, "A goal without an action plan is a daydream."
Motion creates the self. In my experience as a teacher, consultant, and
writer, I have accumulated 100 ways of thinking that lead directly to
motivation. In my work as a corporate trainer and public seminar leader,
I have often read and researched many volumes of a psychologist's or
philosopher's work to find a single sentence that my seminar students
can use. What I am always looking for are ways of thinking that
energize the mind and get us going again.
So this is a book of ideas. My sole criterion in assembling these ideas
was: How useful are they? I've drawn on the feedback I've gotten from
my corporate and public seminar students to know which ideas make
lasting impressions on people and which don't. The ones that do are in
this book.
Since its first printing in 1996, this little book has enjoyed a success I
never imagined. During its first five years of sales (sales that have
continued to be strong every year, knock on wood) we have seen the
emergence of the Internet as the world's primary source of information.
People have not only been buying this book on the Internet, but they've
been posting their reviews. What's wonderful about Internet bookstores
is that they feature reviews by regular people, not just professional
journalists who need to be witty, cynical, and clever to survive.
One such reviewer of 100 Ways in its original edition was Bubba
Spencer from Tennessee. He wrote:
"Not a real in-depth book with many complicated theories about how to
improve your life. Mostly, just good tips to increase your motivation. A
'should read' if you want to improve any part of your life."
                                   page_16

Page 17
Bubba gave this book five stars, and I am more grateful to him than to
any professional reviewer. He says I did what I set out to do.
  "Making the simple complicated
   is commonplace; making the
  complicated simple, awesomely
      simple, that's creativity."
          —Charles Mingus,
       legendary jazz musician
                                  page_17

Page 18
This page intentionally left blank.
                                 page_18

Page 19
100 Ways
1. Get on your deathbed
A number of years ago when I was working with psychotherapist
Devers Branden, she put me through her "deathbed" exercise.
I was asked to clearly imagine myself lying on my own deathbed, and to
fully realize the feelings connected with dying and saying good-bye.
Then she asked me to mentally invite the people in my life who were
important to me to visit my bedside, one at a time. As I visualized each
friend and relative coming in to visit me, I had to speak to them out
loud. I had to say to them what I wanted them to know as I was dying.
As I spoke to each person, I could feel my voice breaking. Somehow I
couldn't help breaking down. My eyes were filled with tears. I
experienced such a sense of loss. It was not my own life I was
mourning; it was the love I was losing. To be more exact, it was a
communication of love that had never been there.
During this difficult exercise, I really got to see how much I'd left out of
my life. How many wonderful feelings I had about my children, for
example, that I'd never explicitly expressed.
                                   page_19

Page 20
At the end of the exercise, I was an emotional mess. I had rarely cried
that hard in my life. But when those emotions cleared, a wonderful
thing happened. I was clear. I knew what was really important, and who
really mattered to me. I understood for the first time what George
Patton meant when he said, "Death can be more exciting than life."
From that day on I vowed not to leave anything to chance. I made up
my mind never to leave anything unsaid. I wanted to live as if I might
die any moment. The entire experience altered the way I've related to
people ever since. And the great point of the exercise wasn't lost on me:
We don't have to wait until we're actually near death to receive these
benefits of being mortal. We can create the experience anytime we
want.
A few years later when my mother lay dying in a hospital in Tucson, I
rushed to her side to hold her hand and repeat to her all the love and
gratitude I felt for who she had been for me. When she finally died, my
grieving was very intense, but very short. In a matter of days I felt that
everything great about my mother had entered into me and would live
there as a loving spirit forever.
A year and a half before my father's death, I began to send him letters
and poems about his contribution to my life. He lived his last months
and died in the grip of chronic illness, so communicating and getting
through to him in person wasn't always easy. But I always felt good that
he had those letters and poems to read. Once he called me after I'd sent
him a Father's Day poem, and he said, "Hey, I guess I wasn't such a bad
father after all."
Poet William Blake warned us about keeping our thoughts locked up
until we die. "When thought is closed
                                  page_20
Page 21
in caves," he wrote, "then love will show its roots in deepest hell."
Pretending you aren't going to die is detrimental to your enjoyment of
life. It is detrimental in the same way that it would be detrimental for a
basketball player to pretend there was no end to the game he was
playing. That player would reduce his intensity, adopt a lazy playing
style, and, of course, end up not having any fun at all. Without an end,
there is no game. Without being conscious of death, you can't be fully
aware of the gift of life.
Yet many of us (including myself) keep pretending that our life's game
will have no end. We keep planning to do great things some day when
we feel like it. We assign our goals and dreams to that imaginary island
in the sea that Denis Waitley calls "Someday Isle." We find ourselves
saying, "Someday I'll do this," and "Someday I'll do that."
Confronting our own death doesn't have to wait until we run out of life.
In fact, being able to vividly imagine our last hours on our deathbed
creates a paradoxical sensation: the feeling of being born all over
again—the first step to fearless self-motivation. "People living deeply,"
wrote poet and diarist Anaïs Nin, "have no fear of death."
And as Bob Dylan has sung, "He who is not busy being born is busy
dying."
2. Stay hungry
Arnold Schwarzenegger was not famous yet in 1976 when he and I had
lunch together at the Doubletree Inn in Tucson, Arizona. Not one
person in the restaurant recognized him.
                                   page_21

Page 22
He was in town publicizing the movie Stay Hungry, a box-office
disappointment he had just made with Jeff Bridges and Sally Field. I
was a sports columnist for the Tucson Citizen at the time, and my
assignment was to spend a full day, one-on-one, with Arnold and write a
feature story about him for our newspaper's Sunday magazine.
I, too, had no idea who he was, or who he was going to become. I
agreed to spend the day with him because I had to—it was an
assignment. And although I took to it with an uninspired attitude, it was
one I'd never forget.
Perhaps the most memorable part of that day with Schwarzenegger
occurred when we took an hour for lunch. I had my reporter's notebook
out and was asking questions for the story while we ate. At one point I
casually asked him, "Now that you have retired from bodybuilding,
what are you going to do next?"
And with a voice as calm as if he were telling me about some mundane
travel plans, he said, "I'm going to be the number-one box-office star in
all of Hollywood."
Mind you, this was not the slim, aerobic Arnold we know today. This
man was pumped up and huge. And so for my own physical sense of
well-being, I tried to appear to find his goal reasonable.
I tried not to show my shock and amusement at his plan. After all, his
first attempt at movies didn't promise much. And his Austrian accent
and awkward monstrous build didn't suggest instant acceptance by
movie audiences. I finally managed to match his calm demeanor, and I
asked him just how he planned to become Hollywood's top star.
"It's the same process I used in bodybuilding," he explained. "What you
do is create a vision of who you want to be, and then live into that
picture as if it were already true."
                                  page_22

Page 23
It sounded ridiculously simple. Too simple to mean anything. But I
wrote it down. And I never forgot it.
I'll never forget the moment when some entertainment TV show was
saying that box office receipts from his second Terminator movie had
made him the most popular box office draw in the world. Was he
psychic? Or was there something to his formula?
Over the years I've used Arnold's idea of creating a vision as a
motivational tool. I've also elaborated on it in my corporate training
seminars. I invite people to notice that Arnold said that you create a
vision. He did not say that you wait until you receive a vision. You
create one. In other words, you make it up.
A major part of living a life of self-motivation is having something to
wake up for in the morning—something that you are "up to" in life so
that you will stay hungry.
The vision can be created right now—better now than later. You can
always change it if you want, but don't live a moment longer without
one. Watch what being hungry to live that vision does to your ability to
motivate yourself.
3. Tell yourself a true lie
I remember when my then-12-year-old daughter Margery participated
in a school poetry reading in which all her classmates had to write a "lie
poem" about how great they were.
They were supposed to make up untruths about themselves that made
them sound unbelievably wonderful. I realized as I listened to the poems
that the children were doing an unintended version of what Arnold did
to clarify the picture of his future. By
                                 page_23

Page 24
"lying" to themselves they were creating a vision of who they wanted to
be.
It's noteworthy, too, that public schools are so out of touch with the
motivational sources of individual achievement and personal success
that in order to invite children to express big visions for themselves they
have to invite the children to "lie." (As it was said in the movie ET,
"How do you explain school to a higher intelligence?")
Most of us are unable to see the truth of who we could be. My
daughter's school developed an unintended solution to that difficulty: If
it's hard for you to imagine the potential in yourself, then you might
want to begin by expressing it as a fantasy, as did the children who
wrote the poems. Think up some stories about who you would like to
be. Your subconscious mind doesn't know you're fantasizing (it either
receives pictures or doesn't).
Soon you will begin to create the necessary blueprint for stretching your
accomplishments. Without a picture of your highest self, you can't live
into that self. Fake it till you make it. The lie will become the truth.
4. Keep your eyes on the prize
Most of us never really focus. We constantly feel a kind of irritating
psychic chaos because we keep trying to think of too many things at
once. There's always too much up there on the screen.
There was an interesting motivational talk on this subject given by
former Dallas Cowboys coach Jimmy Johnson to his football players
before the 1993 Super Bowl:
"I told them that if I laid a two-by-four across the room, everybody
there would walk across it and not fall, because our focus would be that
we were going to walk
                                   page_24

Page 25
that two-by-four, But if I put that same two-by-four 10 stories high
between two buildings only a few would make it, because the focus
would be on falling. Focus is everything. The team that is more focused
today is the team that will win this game."
Johnson told his team not to be distracted by the crowd, the media, or
the possibility of losing, but to focus on each play of the game itself just
as if it were a good practice session.
The Cowboys won the game 52-17.
There's a point to that story that goes way beyond football. Most of us
tend to lose our focus in life because we're perpetually worried about so
many negative possibilities. Rather than focusing on the two-by-four,
we worry about all the ramifications of falling. Rather than focusing on
our goals, we are distracted by our worries and fears.
But when you focus on what you want, it will come into your life.
When you focus on being a happy and motivated person, that is who
you will be.
5. Learn to sweat in peace
The harder you are on yourself, the easier life is on you. Or, as they say
in the Navy Seals, the more you sweat in peacetime, the less you bleed
in war.
My childhood friend Rett Nichols was the first to show me this principle
in action. When we were playing Little League baseball, we were
always troubled by how fast the pitchers threw the ball. We were in an
especially good league, and the overgrown opposing pitchers, whose
birth certificates we were always demanding to see, fired the ball in to
us at alarming speeds during the games.
                                 page_25

Page 26
We began dreading going up to the plate to hit. It wasn't fun. Batting
had become something we just tried to get through without
embarrassing ourselves too much.
Then Rett got an idea.
"What if the pitches we faced in games were slower than the ones we
face every day in practice?" Rett asked.
"That's just the problem," I said. "We don't know anybody who can
pitch that fast to us. That's why, in the games, it's so hard. The ball looks
like an aspirin pill coming in at 200 miles an hour."
"I know we don't know anyone who can throw a baseball that fast," said
Rett. "But what if it wasn't a baseball?"
"I don't know what you mean," I said.
Just then Rett pulled from his pocket a little plastic golf ball with holes
in it. The kind our dads used to hit in the backyard for golf practice.
"Get a bat," Rett said.
I picked up a baseball bat and we walked out to the park near Rett's
house. Rett went to the pitcher's mound but came in about three feet
closer than usual. As I stood at the plate, he fired the little golf ball past
me as I tried to swing at it.
"Ha ha!" Rett shouted. "That's faster than anybody you'll face in little
league! Let's get going!"
We then took turns pitching to each other with this bizarre little ball
humming in at incredible speeds. The little plastic ball was not only
hilariously fast, but it curved and dropped more sharply than any little
leaguer's pitch could do.
By the time Rett and I played our next league game, we were ready.
The pitches looked like they were coming in slow motion. Big white
balloons.
                               page_26

Page 27
I hit the first and only home run I ever hit after one of Rett's sessions. It
was off a left-hander whose pitch seemed to hang in the air forever
before I creamed it.
The lesson Rett taught me was one I've never forgotten. Whenever I'm
afraid of something coming up, I will find a way to do something that's
even harder or scarier. Once I do the harder thing, the real thing
becomes fun.
The great boxer Muhammad Ali used to use this principle in choosing
his sparring partners. He'd make sure that the sparring partners he
worked with before a fight were better than the boxer he was going up
against in the real fight. They might not always be better all-around, but
he found sparring partners who were each better in one certain way or
another than his upcoming opponent. After facing them, he knew going
into each fight that he had already fought those skills and won.
You can always "stage" a bigger battle than the one you have to face. If
you have to make a presentation in front of someone who scares you,
you can always rehearse it first in front of someone who scares you
more. If you've got something hard to do and you're hesitant to do it,
pick out something even harder and do that first.
Watch what it does to your motivation going into the "real" challenge.
6. Simplify your life
The great Green Bay Packer's football coach Vince Lombardi was once
asked why his world championship team, which had so many multi-
talented players, ran such a simple set of plays. "It's hard to be
aggressive when you're confused," he said.
                                 page_27

Page 28
One of the benefits of creatively planning your life is that it allows you
to simplify. You can weed out, delegate, and eliminate all activities that
don't contribute to your projected goals.
Another effective way to simplify your life is to combine your tasks.
Combining allows you to achieve two or more objectives at once.
For example, as I plan my day today, I notice that I need to shop for my
family after work. That's a task I can't avoid because we're running out
of everything. I also note that one of my goals is to finish reading my
daughter Stephanie's book reports. I realize, too, that I've made a
decision to spend more time doing things with all my kids, as I've tended
lately to just come home and crash at the end of a long day.
An aggressive orientation to the day—making each day simpler and
stronger than the day before—allows you to look at all of these tasks
and small goals and ask yourself, "What can I combine?" (Creativity is
really little more than making unexpected combinations, in music,
architecture, anything, including your day.)
After some thought, I realize that I can combine shopping with doing
something with my children. (That looks obvious and easy, but I can't
count the times I mindlessly go shopping, or do things on my own just to
get them done, and then run out of time to play with the kids.)
I also think a little further and remember that the grocery store where
we shop has a little deli with tables in it. My kids love to make lists and
go up and down the aisles themselves to fill the grocery cart, so I decide
to read my daughter's book reports at the deli while they travel the
aisles for food. They see where I'm sitting, and keep coming over to
update me on what they are choosing. After an hour or so, three things
                                    page_28

Page 29
have happened at once: 1) I've done something with the kids; 2) I've
read through the book reports; and 3) the shopping has been completed.
In her book, Brain Building, Marilyn Vos Savant recommends
something similar to simplify life. She advises that we make a list of
absolutely every small task that has to be done, say, over the weekend,
and then do them all at once, in one exciting focused action. A manic
blitz. In other words, fuse all small tasks together and make the doing of
them one task so that the rest of the weekend is absolutely free to create
as we wish.
Bob Koether, who I will talk about later as the president of Infincom,
has the most simplified time management system I've ever seen in my
life. His method is this: Do everything right on the spot—don't put
anything unnecessarily into your future. Do it now, so that the future is
always wide open. Watching him in action is always an experience.
I'll be sitting in his office and I'll mention the name of a person whose
company I'd like to take my training to in the future.
"Will you make a note to get in touch with him and let him know I'll be
calling?" I ask.
"Make a note?" he asks in horror.
The next thing I know, before I can say anything, Bob's wheeling in his
chair and dialing the person on the phone. Within two minutes he's
scheduled a meeting between the person and me and after he puts down
the phone he says, "Okay, done! What's next?"
I tell him I've prepared the report he wanted on training for his service
teams and I hand it to him.
"You can read it later and get back to me," I offer.
"Hold on a second," he says, already deeply absorbed in reading the
report's content. After 10 minutes or so,
                                 page_29

Page 30
during which time he's read much of what interests him aloud, the report
has been digested, discussed, and filed.
It's a time management system like no other. What could you call it?
Perhaps, Handle Everything Immediately. It keeps Bob's life simple. He
is an aggressive and successful CEO, and, as Vince Lombardi said, "It's
hard to be aggressive when you're confused."
Most people are reluctant to see themselves as being creative because
they associate creativity with complexity. But creativity is simplicity.
Michelangelo said that he could actually see his masterpiece, "The
David," in the huge, rough rock he discovered in a marble quarry. His
only job, he said, was to carve away what wasn't necessary and he
would have his statue. Achieving simplicity in our cluttered and hectic
lives is also an ongoing process of carving away what's not necessary.
My most dramatic experience of the power of simplicity occurred in
1984 when I was hired to help write the television and radio
advertisements for Jim Kolbe, a candidate for United States Congress
running in Arizona's Fifth District. In that campaign, I saw firsthand
how focus, purpose, and simplicity can work together to create a great
result.
Based on prior political history, Kolbe had about a 3 percent chance of
winning the election. His opponent was a popular incumbent
congressman, during a time when incumbents were almost never
defeated by challengers. In addition, Kolbe was a Republican in a
largely Democratic district. And the final strike against him was that he
had tried once before to defeat this same man, Jim McNulty, and had
lost. The voters had already spoken on the issue.
Kolbe himself supplied the campaign with its sense of purpose. A
tireless campaigner with unwavering
                                  page_30

Page 31
principles, he emanated his sense of mission and we all drew energy
from him.
Political consultant Joe Shumate, one of the shrewdest people I've ever
worked with, kept us all focused with consistent campaign strategy. It
was the job of the advertising and media work to keep it strong and
simple.
Although our opponent ran nearly 15 different TV ads, each one about a
different issue, we determined from the outset that we would stick to
the same message throughout, from the first ad to the last. We basically
ran the same ad over and over. We knew that although the district was
largely Democratic, our polling showed that philosophically it was more
conservative. Kolbe himself was conservative, so his views coincided
with the voters' better than our opponent's did, although the voters
weren't yet aware of it. By having each of our ads focused on our
simple theme—who better represents you—we gained rapidly in the
polls as election night neared.
The nightlong celebration of Jim Kolbe's upset victory brought a huge
message home to me: The simpler you keep it, the stronger it gets.
Kolbe won a close victory that night, but he remains in Congress today,
more than 10 years later, and his victory margins are now huge. He has
never complicated his message, and he has kept his politics strong and
simple, even when it looked unpopular to do so.
It's hard to stay motivated when you're confused. When you simplify
your life, it gathers focus. The more you can focus your life, the more
motivated it gets.
7. Look for the lost gold
When I am happy, I see the happiness in others. When I am
compassionate, I see the compassion in other
                                  page_31

Page 32
people. When I am full of energy and hope, I see opportunities all
around me.
But when I am angry, I see other people as unnecessarily testy. When I
am depressed, I notice that people's eyes look sad. When I am weary, I
see the world as boring and unattractive.
Who I am is what I see!
If I drive into Phoenix and complain, "What a crowded, smog-ridden
mess this place is!" I am really expressing what a crowded, smog-ridden
mess I am at that moment. If I had been feeling motivated that day, and
full of hope and happiness, I could just as easily have said, while driving
into Phoenix, "Wow, what a thriving, energetic metropolis this is!"
Again, I would have been describing my inner landscape, not Phoenix's.
Our self-motivation suffers most from how we choose to see the
circumstances in our lives. That's because we don't see things as they
are, we see things as we are.
In every circumstance, we can look for the gold, or look for the filth.
And what we look for, we find. The best starting point for
self-motivation is in what we choose to look for in what we see around
us. Do we see the opportunity everywhere?
"When I open my eyes in the morning," said Colin Wilson, "I am not
confronted by the world, but by a million possible worlds."
It is always our choice. Which world do we want to see today?
Opportunity is life's gold. It's all you need to be happy. It's the fertile
field in which you grow as a person. And opportunities are like those
subatomic quantum particles that come into existence only when they
are seen by an observer. Your opportunities will multiply when you
choose to see them.
                                    page_32

Page 33
8. Push all your own buttons
Have you ever peeked into the cockpit of a large airliner as you boarded
a plane? It's an impressive display of buttons, levers, dials, and switches
under one big windshield.
What if, as you were boarding, you overheard the pilot say to the
co-pilot, "Joe, remind me, what does this set of buttons do?"
If I heard that, it would make it a rough flight for me. But most of us
pilot our own lives that way, without much knowledge of the
instruments. We don't take the time to learn where our own buttons are,
or what they can do.
From now on, make it a personal commitment to notice everything that
pushes your buttons. Make a note of everything that inspires you. That's
your control panel. Those buttons operate your whole system of
personal motivation.
Motivation doesn't have to be accidental. For example, you don't have
to wait for hours until a certain song comes on the radio that picks up
your spirits. You can control what songs you hear.
If there are certain songs that always lift you up, make a tape or CD of
those songs and have it ready to play in your car. Go through all of your
music and create a "greatest motivational hits" tape for yourself.
Use the movies, too.
How many times do you leave a movie feeling inspired and ready to
take on the world? Whenever that happens, put the name of the movie
in a special notebook that you might label "the right buttons." Six
months to a year later, you can rent the movie and get the same inspired
feeling. Most movies that inspire us are even better the second time
around.
                                  page_33
Page 34
You have much more control over your environment than you realize.
You can begin programming yourself consciously to be more and more
focused and motivated. Get to know your control panel and learn how
to push your own buttons. The more you know about how you operate,
the easier it will be to motivate yourself.
9. Build a track record
It's not what we do that makes us tired—it's what we don't do. The tasks
we don't complete cause the most fatigue.
I was giving a motivational seminar to a utility company recently, and
during one of the breaks a small man who looked to be in his 60s came
up to me.
"My problem," he said, "is that I never seem to finish anything. I'm
always starting things—this project and that, but I never finish. I'm
always off on to something else before anything is completed."
He then asked whether I could give him some affirmations that might
alter his belief system. He correctly saw the problem as being one of
belief. Because he did not believe he was a good finisher, he did not
finish anything. So he wanted a magical word or phrase to repeat to
himself that would brainwash him into being different.
"Do you think affirmations are what you need?" I asked him. "If you
had to learn how to use a computer, could you do it by sitting on your
bed and repeating the affirmations, 'I know how to use a computer. I am
great at using computers. I am a wizard on a computer'?"
He admitted that affirmations would probably have no effect on his
ability to use a computer.
"The best way to change your belief system is to change the truth about
you," I said. "We believe the truth
                                  page_34

Page 35
faster than we believe false affirmations. To believe that you are a good
finisher, you must begin by building a track record of finished tasks."
He followed my suggestions with great enthusiasm. He bought a
notebook and at the top of the first page he wrote, "Things I've
Finished." Each day, he made a point of setting small goals and finishing
them. Whereas in the past he would be sweeping his front walk and
leave it unfinished when the phone rang, now he'd let the phone ring so
he could finish the job and record it in his notebook. The more things he
wrote down, the more confident he became that he was truly becoming
a finisher. And he had a notebook to prove it.
Consider how much more permanent his new belief was than if he had
tried to do it with affirmations. He could have whispered to himself all
night long, "I am a great finisher," but the right side of his brain would
have known better. It would have said to him, "No you're not."
Stop worrying about what you think of yourself and start building a
track record that proves that you can motivate yourself to do whatever
you want to do.
10. Welcome the unexpected
Most people do not see themselves as being creative, but we all are.
Most people say, "My sister's creative, she paints," or "My father's
creative, he sings and writes music." We miss the point that we are all
creative.
One of the reasons we don't see ourselves that way is that we normally
associate being "creative" with being "original." But in reality, creativity
has nothing to do with originality—it has everything to do with being
unexpected.
You don't have to be original to be creative. In fact, it sometimes helps
to realize that no one is original.
                                   page_35

Page 36
Even Mozart said that he never wrote an original melody in his life. His
melodies were all recombinations of old folk melodies.
Look at Elvis Presley. People thought he was a true original when he
first came upon the scene. But he wasn't. He was just the first white
person to ever sing with enthusiasm. His versions of songs, however,
were often direct copies from African-American rhythm and blues
singers. Elvis acknowledged that his entire style was a combination of
Little Richard, Jackie Wilson, and James Brown, as well as a variety of
gospel singers.
Although Elvis wasn't original, he was creative. Because he was so
unexpected.
If you believe you were created in the image of your Creator, then you
must, therefore, be creative. Then, if you're willing to see yourself as
creative, you can begin to cultivate it in everything you do. You can
start coming up with all kinds of unexpected solutions to the challenges
that life throws at you.
11. Find your master key
I used to have the feeling that everyone else in life had at one time or
another been issued instruction books on how to make life work. And I,
for some reason, wasn't there when they passed them out.
I felt a little like the Spanish poet Cesar Vallejo, who wrote, "Well, on
the day I was born, God was sick."
Still struggling in my mid-30s with a pessimistic outlook and no sense of
purpose, I voiced my frustration once to a friend of mine, Dr. Mike
Killebrew, who recommended a book to me. Until that time, I didn't
really believe that there could be a book that could tell you how to
make your life work.
                                 page_36

Page 37
The name of the book was The Master Key to Riches by Napoleon Hill.
It sat on my shelf for quite awhile. I didn't believe in motivational books
or self-help. They were for weak and gullible fools. I was finally
persuaded to read the book by the word riches in the title. Riches would
be a welcome addition to my life. Riches were probably what I needed
to make me happy and wipe out my troubles.
What the book actually did was a lot more than increase my earning
capacity (although by practicing the principles in the book, my earnings
doubled in less than a year). Napoleon Hill's advice ultimately sparked a
fire in me that changed my entire life.
I soon acquired an ability that I would later realize was self-motivation.
After reading that book, I read all of Napoleon Hill's books. I also began
buying motivational audiobooks for listening to in my car and for
playing by my bed as I went to sleep each night. Everything I had
learned in school, in college, and from my family and friends was out
the window. Without fully understanding it, I was engaging in the
process of completely rebuilding my own thinking. I was, thought by
thought, replacing the old cynical and passive orientation to life with a
new optimistic and energetic outlook.
So, what is this master key to riches?
"The great master key to riches," said Hill, "is nothing more or less than
the self-discipline necessary to help you take full and complete
possession of your own mind. Remember, it is profoundly significant
that the only thing over which you have complete control is your own
mental attitude."
Taking complete possession of my own mind would be a lifelong
adventure, but it was one that I was excited about beginning.
                                  page_37

Page 38
Maybe Hill's book will not be your own master key, but I promise you
that you'll find an instruction book on how to make your life work if you
keep looking. It might be The Power of Now by Eckhart Tolle, The Last
Word in Power by Tracy Goss, Frankenstein's Castle by Colin Wilson,
or The Six Pillars of Self-Esteem by Nathaniel Branden. All those
books would have worked the primary transformation for me, and they
have all taken me higher up the motivational ladder. Your own key
might even come from the spiritual literature of your choice. You'll find
it when you're ready to seek. It's out there waiting for you.
12. Put your library on wheels
One of the greatest opportunities for motivating yourself today lies in
the way you use your drive time.
There is no longer any excuse for time in the car to be down time or
frustrating or time that isn't motivating. With the huge variety of
audiotapes and CDs now available, you can use your time on the road
to educate and motivate yourself at the same time.
When we use our time in the car to simply listen to hip-hop or to curse
traffic, we are undermining our own frame of mind. Moreover, by
listening to tabloid-type "news" programs for too long a period of time,
we actually get a distorted view of life. News programs today have one
goal: to shock or sadden the listener. The most vulgar and horrific
stories around the state and nation are searched for and found.
I experienced this firsthand when I worked for a daily newspaper. I saw
how panicked the city desk got if there were no murders or rapes that
day. I watched as they tore through the wire stories to see if a news item
from another state could be gruesome enough to save the front
                                   page_38

Page 39
page. If there's no drowning, they'll reluctantly go with a near-drowning.
There is nothing wrong with this. It's not immoral or unethical. It feeds
the public's hunger for bad news. It's exactly what people want, so, in a
way, it is a service.
But it reaches its most damaging proportions when the average listener
to a car radio believes that all this bad news is a true and fair reflection
of what's happening in the world. It's not. It is deliberately selected to
spice up the broadcast and keep people listening. It is designed to
horrify, because horrified people are a riveted audience and advertisers
like it that way.
The media have also found ways to extend the stories that are truly
horrible, so that we don't hear them just once. If a plane goes down, we
can listen all week long as investigators pick through the wreckage and
family members weep before the microphones. A week later, playing
the last words of the pilots found in the black box, on the air, extends
the story further.
In the meantime, while we are glued to our news stations, air safety is
better than ever before. Literally millions of planes are taking off and
landing without incident. Deaths per passenger mile are decreasing
every year as the technology for safe flight improves. But is that news?
No. And because my seminar schedule requires that I travel a lot by air,
I can see up close what the so-called "news" has done to our psyches.
Simple turbulence in the air will cause my fellow passengers' eyes to
enlarge and their hands to grip their armrests in terror. The negative
programming of our minds has had a huge impact on us.
If we would be more selective with how we program our minds while
we are driving, we could have some exciting breakthroughs in two
important areas: knowledge and motivation. There are now hundreds of
                                 page_39

Page 40
audiobook series on self-motivation, on how to use the Internet, on
health, on goal setting, and on all the useful subjects that we need to
think about if we're going to grow.
As Emerson once said, "We become what we think about all day long."
(I first heard that sentence, years ago, while driving in my car listening
to an Earl Nightingale audio program!) If we leave what we think about
to chance, or to a tabloid radio station, then we lose a large measure of
control over our own minds.
Many people today drive a great deal of the time. With motivational
and educational audiobooks, it has been estimated that drivers can
receive the equivalent of a full semester in college with three months'
worth of driving. Most libraries have large sections devoted to
audiobooks, and all the best and all the current audiobooks are now
available on Internet bookseller's sites.
Are all motivational programs effective? No. Some might not move you
at all. That's why it's good to read the customer reviews before buying
an audio program over the Internet.
But there have been so many times when a great motivational audio
played in my car has had a positive impact on my frame of mind and my
ability to live and work with enthusiasm.
One moment stands out in my memory above all others, although there
have been hundreds. I was driving in my car one day listening to Wayne
Dyer's classic audio series, Choosing Your Own Greatness. At the end
of a long, moving argument for not making our happiness dependent on
some material object hanging out there in our future, Dyer said, "There
is no way to happiness. Happiness is the way."
                                   page_40

Page 41
That one thought eased itself into my mind at that moment and never
left it. It is not an "original" thought, but Dyer's gentle presentation, so
filled with serene joy and so effortlessly spoken, changed me in a way
that no ancient volume of wisdom ever could have. That's one of the
powers of the audiobook form of learning: It simulates an extremely
intimate one-on-one experience.
Wayne Dyer, Marianne Williamson, Caroline Myss, Barbara Sher, Tom
Peters, Nathaniel Branden, Earl Nightingale, Alan Watts, and Anthony
Robbins are just a few motivators whose tapes have changed my life.
You'll find your own favorites.
You don't have to find time to go read at the library. Forget the library.
You are already driving in one.
13. Definitely plan your work
Some of us may think we're too depressed right now to start on a new
course of personal motivation. Or we're too angry. Or we're too upset
about certain problems.
But Napoleon Hill insisted that that's the perfect time to learn one of
life's most unusual rules: "There is one unbeatable rule for the mastery
of sorrows and disappointments, and that is the transmutation of those
emotional frustrations through definitely planned work. It is a rule
which has no equal."
Once we get the picture of who we want to be, "definitely planned
work" is the next step on the path. Definitely planned work inspires the
energy of purpose. Without it, we suffer from a weird kind of intention
deficit disorder. We're short on intention. We don't know where we're
going or what we're up to.
When I was a training instructor at a time-management company many
years ago, we taught people in business how to maximize time spent on
the job. The
                                 page_41

Page 42
primary idea was this: One hour of planning saves three hours of
execution.
However, most of us don't feel we have time for that hour of planning.
We're too busy cleaning up yesterday's problems (that were caused by
lack of planning). We don't yet see that planning would be the most
productive hour we spend. Instead, we wander unconsciously into the
workplace and react to crises. (Again, most of which result from a
failure to plan.)
A carefully planned meeting can take a third of the time that an
unplanned free-for-all takes. A carefully planned day can take a third of
the time that an unplanned free-for-all day takes.
My friend Kirk Nelson manages a large sales staff at a major radio
station. His success in life was moderate until he discovered the
principle of definitely planned work. Now he spends two hours each
weekend on his computer planning the week ahead.
"It's made all the difference in the world," he said. "Not only do I get
three times the work done, but I feel so in control. The week feels like
my week. The work feels like my work. My life feels like my life."
It is impossible to work with a definite sense of purpose and be
depressed at the same time. Carefully planned work will motivate you
to do more and worry less.
14. Bounce your thoughts
If you've ever coached or worked with kids who play basketball, you
know that most of them have a tendency to dribble with only one
hand—the one attached to their dominant arm.
When you notice a child doing this, you might call him aside and say,
"Billy, you're dribbling with just the
                                  page_42

Page 43
one hand every time, and the defender can easily defend you when you
do that. Your options are cut off. You need to dribble with your other
hand, too, so that he never knows which way you're going to go."
At this point Billy might say, "I can't." And you smile and say, "What
do you mean you can't?"
And Billy then shows you that when he dribbles with his subdominant
(weaker) hand and arm, the ball is all over the place. So, to his mind, he
can't.
"Billy," you say. "It's not that you can't, it's just that you haven't."
Then you explain to Billy that his other hand can dribble just as well if
he is willing to practice. It's just a matter of logging enough bounces. It's
the simple formation of a habit. After enough practice dribbling with his
other hand, Billy will learn you were right.
The same principle is true for reprogramming our own dominant habits
of thinking. If our dominant thought habit is pessimistic, all we have to
do is dribble with the other hand: Think optimistic thoughts more and
more often until it feels natural.
If someone had asked me (before I started my journey to
self-motivation that began with Napoleon Hill) why I didn't try to be
more goal oriented and optimistic, I would have said, "I can't. It's just
not me. I wouldn't know how." But it would have been more accurate
for me to just say, "I haven't."
Thinking is just like bouncing the basketball. On the one hand, I can
think pessimistically and build that side of me up (it's just a matter of
repeatedly bouncing those thoughts). On the other hand, I can think
optimistically—one thought at a time—and build that habit up.
Self-motivation is all a matter of how much in control you want to be.
                                 page_43

Page 44
I read somewhere that we humans have up to 45,000 thoughts a day. I
can't vouch for the accuracy of that figure, especially because I know
some people who seem to have no more than nine or 10. However, if it
is true that we have 45,000 thoughts, then you can see how patient we
have to be about turning a pessimistic thought habit around.
The overall pattern won't change after just a few positive bounces of the
brain. If you're a pessimist, your bio-computer has really been
programmed heavily in that direction. But it doesn't take long before a
new pattern can emerge. As a former pessimist myself, I can tell you it
really happens, however slowly but surely. You do change. One thought
at a time.
If you can bounce it one way, you can bounce it the other.
15. Light your lazy dynamite
Henry Ford used to point out to his colleagues that there wasn't any job
that couldn't be handled if they were willing to break it down into little
pieces.
And when you've broken a job down, remember to allow yourself some
slow motion in beginning the first piece. Just take it slow and easy.
Because it isn't important how fast you are doing it. What's important is
that you are doing it.
Most of our hardest jobs never seem to get done. The mere thought of
doing the whole job, at a high energy level, is frequently too off-putting
to allow motivation to occur.
But a good way to ease yourself into that motivation is to act as if you
were the laziest person on the planet. (It wasn't much of an act for me!)
By accepting that you're going to do your task in a slow and lazy way,
                                  page_44

Page 45
there is no anxiety or dread about getting it started. In fact, you can
even have fun by entering into it as if you were in a slow-motion
comedy, flowing into the work like a person made of water.
But the paradox is that the slower you start something, the faster you
will be finished.
When you first think about doing something hard or overwhelming, you
are most aware of how you don't want to do it at all. In other words, the
mental picture you have of the activity, of doing it fast and furiously, is
not a happy picture. So you think of ways to avoid doing the job
altogether.
The thought of starting slowly is an easy thought. And doing it slowly
allows you to actually start doing it. Therefore it gets finished.
Another thing that happens when you flow into a project slowly is that
speed will often overtake you without your forcing it. Just as the natural
rhythm inside you will get you in sync with what you are doing. You'll
be surprised how soon your conscious mind stops forcing the action and
your subconscious mind supplies you with easy energy.
So take your time. Start out lazy. Soon your tasks will be keeping the
slow but persistent rhythm of that hypnotic song on Paul McCartney's
Red Rose Speedway album, "Oh Lazy Dynamite."
The dynamite is living inside you. You don't have to be frenzied about
setting it off. It lights just as well to a match struck slowly.
16. Choose the happy few
Politely walk away from friends who don't support the changes in your
life.
                                     page_45

Page 46
There will be friends who don't. They will be jealous and afraid every
time you make a change. They will see your new motivation as a
condemnation of their own lack of it. In subtle ways, they will bring you
back down to who you used to be. Beware of friends and family who do
this. They know not what they do.
The people you spend time with will change your life in one way or
another. If you associate with cynics, they'll pull you down with them. If
you associate with people who support you in being happy and
successful, you will have a head start on being happy and successful.
Throughout the day we have many choices regarding who we are going
to be with and talk to. Don't just gravitate to the coffee machine and
participate in the negative gossip because it's the only game in town. It
will drain your energy and stifle your own optimism. We all know who
lifts us up, and we all know who brings us down. It's okay to start being
more careful about to whom we give our time.
In his inspiring book Spontaneous Healing, Andrew Weil recommends:
"Make a list of friends and acquaintances in whose company you feel
more alive, happier, more optimistic. Pick one whom you will spend
some time with this week."
When you're in a conversation with a cynic, possibilities seem to have a
way of disappearing. A mildly depressing sense of fatalism seems to
take over the conversation. No new ideas and no innovative humor.
"Cynics," observed President Calvin Coolidge, "do not create."
On the other hand, enthusiasm for life is contagious. And being in a
conversation with an optimist always opens us up to see more and more
of life's possibilities.
                                page_46

Page 47
Kierkegaard once said, "If I were to wish for anything, I should not wish
for wealth and power, but for the passionate sense of the potential, for
the eye which, ever young and ardent, sees the possible. Pleasure
disappoints, possibility never."
17. Learn to play a role
Your future is not determined by your personality. In fact, your
personality is not even determined by your personality. There is no
genetic code in you that determines who you will be. You are the
thinker who determines who you will be. How you act is who you
become.
Another way of seeing that might be contained in these related thoughts
from Star Trek's Leonard Nimoy: "Spock had a big, big effect on me. I
am so much more Spock-like today than when I first played the part in
1965 that you wouldn't recognize me. I'm not talking about appearance,
but thought processes. Doing that character, I learned so much about
rational logical thought that it reshaped my life."
You'll gather energy and inspiration by being the character you want to
play.
I took an acting class a few years ago because I thought it would help
me deal with my overwhelming stage fright. But I learned something
much more valuable than how to relax in front of a crowd. I learned
that my emotions were tools for me to use, not demonic forces. I
learned that my emotions were mine to work with and change at will.
Although I had read countless times that our own deliberate thoughts
control our emotions, and that the feelings we have are all caused by
what we think, I never trusted that concept as real, because it didn't
always feel real.
                                   page_47

Page 48
To me, it felt more like emotion was an all-powerful thing that could
overcome my thinking and ruin a good day (or a good relationship).
It took a great acting teacher, Judy Rollings, and my own long struggles
with performing difficult scenes to show me that my emotions really
could be under the complete control of my mind. I found out that I
could motivate myself by thinking and acting like a motivated person,
just as I could depress myself by thinking and acting like a depressed
person. With practice, the fine line between acting and being
disappeared.
We love great actors because it seems like they are the characters they
play. Poor actors are those who can't "be" their part and therefore don't
convince us of their character's reality. We hoot at those people. We
call it bad acting.
Yet we don't realize that we ourselves miss the same opportunities in
life when we can't "be" the person we want to be. It doesn't take
authentic circumstances to be who you want to be. It just takes
rehearsal.
18. Don't just do something...sit there
For a long time, all by yourself, sit quietly, absolutely alone. Completely
relax. Don't allow the television or music to be on. Just be with yourself.
Watch for what happens. Feel your sense of belonging to the silence.
Observe insights starting to appear. Observe your relationship with
yourself starting to get better and softer and more comfortable.
Sitting quietly allows your true dream life to give you hints and flashes
of motivation. In this information-rich, interactive, civilized life today,
you are either living your dream or living someone else's. And unless
you
                                  page_48

Page 49
give your own dream the time and space it needs to formulate itself,
you'll spend the better part of your life simply helping others make their
dreams come true.
"All of man's troubles," said Blaise Pascal, "stem from his inability to sit
alone, quietly, in a room for any length of time."
Notice that he did not say some of man's troubles, but all.
Sometimes, in my seminars on motivation, a person will ask me, "Why
is it that I get my best ideas when I'm in the shower?"
I usually ask the person, "When else during your day are you alone with
yourself, without any distractions?"
If the person is honest, the answer is never.
Great ideas come to us in the shower when it's the only time in the day
when we're completely alone. No television, no movies, no traffic, no
radio, no family, no talkative pets—nothing to distract our mind from
conversing with itself.
"Thinking," said Plato, "is the soul talking to itself."
People worry they will die of boredom or fear if they are alone for any
length of time. Other people have become so distraction-addicted that
they would consider sitting alone by themselves like being in a sensory-
deprivation tank.
The truth is that the only real motivation we ever experience is
self-motivation that comes from within. And being alone with ourselves
will always give us motivating ideas if we stay with the process long
enough.
The best way to truly understand the world is to remove yourself from
it. Psychic entropy—the seesaw mood swing between boredom and
anxiety—occurs when you allow yourself to become confused by
massive input. By being perpetually busy, glued to your cell phone, out
in
                               page_49

Page 50
the world all day with no time to reflect, you will guarantee yourself an
eventual overwhelming sense of confusion.
The cure is simple and painless. The process is uncomplicated.
"You do not need to leave your room," said Franz Kafka. "Remain
sitting at your table and listen. Do not even listen. Simply wait. Do not
even wait. Be quite still and solitary. The world will freely offer itself to
you to be unmasked. It has no choice, it will roll in ecstasy at your feet."
In other words, don't just do something...sit there.
19. Use your brain chemicals
There are drugs that you can use to motivate yourself with and I'm not
talking about amphetamine or crack (a deadly form of child's play).
Instead, you can get into those energizing chemicals in your system that
get activated when you laugh...or sing...or dance...or run...or hug
someone. When you're having fun, your body chemistry changes and
you get new biochemical surges of motivation and energy.
And there isn't anything you do that can't be transformed into something
interesting and uplifting. Victor Frankl has written startling accounts of
his life in the Nazi concentration camps, and how some prisoners
created new universes unto themselves inside their own minds. It might
sound absurd, but truly imaginative people can access their inner
chemical creativity in the loneliness of a prison cell.
Don't keep trying to go outside yourself searching for something that's
fun. It's not out there anywhere. It's inside. The opportunity for fun is in
your own energy system—your synergy of heart and mind. That's where
you'll find it.
                                   page_50

Page 51
Pro football Hall of Famer Fran Tarkenton recommends looking at any
task you do as fun.
"If it's not fun," he says, "you're not doing it right."
People who get high on marijuana often find they can laugh at anything.
The problem with them is that they think this kind of "fun" is inherent in
the marijuana. It's not. The capacity for fun was already there inside of
them. The marijuana just artificially opened them up to it. But the
physical and psychological price paid for such a drugged opening is not
worth the high. (I wish I didn't know this first hand, but I do.) The price
drug users pay is this: Their self-esteem suffers because they didn't
create the fun they had—they thought the drugs did it for them. So they
keep shrinking, the more they use, into greater paranoia and
self-disgust. Soon they're using the drug just to feel normal.
William Burroughs, a former drug addict and author of Naked Lunch,
discovered something that was very interesting and bitterly amusing to
him after finally recovering from his addictions.
"There isn't any feeling you can get on drugs," he said "that you can't
get without drugs."
Make a commitment to yourself to find the natural highs you need to
stay motivated. Start by finding out what it does to your mood and
energy to laugh, to sing, to dance, to walk, to run, to hug someone, or to
get something done.
Then support your experiments by telling yourself that you're not
interested in doing anything that isn't fun. If you can't immediately see
the fun in something, find a way to create it. Once you have made a
task fun, you have solved the problem of self-motivation.
                                  page_51

Page 52
20. Leave high school forever
Most of us feel like we've been left stranded in high school forever.
Like something happened there that we've never shaken off.
Before high school, in our earlier and more carefree childhoods, we
were creative dreamers filled with a boundless sense of energy and
wonder.
But in high school something got turned around. For the first time in our
lives, we began fearing what other people were thinking of us. All of a
sudden our mission in life became not to be embarrassed. We were
afraid to look bad, and so we made it a point not to take risks.
I'll never forget something that happened to my friend, Richard
Schwarze, in high school. (He is now a respected photographer, and I
won't need to ask his permission to tell this story about him.) Richard
and I were walking home from school one day and all of a sudden he
stopped in his tracks, his face frozen with horror. I looked at him and
asked what was wrong. I thought he was about to suffer some kind of
seizure. He then pointed down at his pants and wordlessly showed me
where his belt had missed a loop!
"I spent the whole day like this!" he finally said. It was impossible for
him to measure what everybody thought of him as they passed him in
the halls, perhaps seeing the belt had missed a loop. The damage to his
reputation was probably beyond repair.
That was high school.
Today when I give my seminars on motivation, I love the periods when
I take questions from the audience. But many times I can see the
painfully adolescent looks of self-consciousness on people's faces when
they ponder the risk of asking a question in front of the group.
                                 page_52

Page 53
This habit of worrying more about what others think of our thoughts
than we do about our own thinking usually begins in high school, but it
can last a lifetime.
It is time to be aware of what we're doing and, once again, leave high
school. It's time to reach back to those pre-high-school days of innocent
creativity and social fearlessness, and draw on that former self.
By the way, I finally came up with a way to deal with the moments of
silence that fill a seminar room when I ask for questions. I go to the
board and make five circles. Then I tell the audience that I used to say
in my classes, "If there are no questions at this point, we'll take a
break." People always want to take a break, so there wasn't much
incentive for asking questions. But questions are the most fun part of a
seminar for me, so I came up with this game: After five questions—we
take a break. Now I find people in the audience urging people around
them to join in asking questions so we can take our break sooner.
Although it's an amusing artificial way to jump-start the dialogue I'm
looking for, what it really does is take the pressure off. It takes the
participants out of high school.
Most people don't realize how easily they can create the social
fearlessness they want to have. Instead, they live like they are still
teenagers, reacting to the imagined judgments of other people. They end
up designing their lives based on what other people might be thinking
about them. A life designed by a teenager! Would you want one?
But you can leave that mind-set behind. You can motivate yourself by
yourself, without depending on the opinions of others. All it takes is a
simple question. As Emerson asked, "Why should the way I feel depend
on the thoughts in someone else's head?"
                                  page_53

Page 54
21. Learn to lose your cool
You can create a self that doesn't care that much about what people
think. You can motivate yourself by leaving the painful
self-consciousness of high school behind.
Because our tendency is to go so far in the timid, non-assertive
direction, it might be a profitable over-correction to adopt these internal
commands: Look bad. Take a risk. Lose face. Be yourself. Share
yourself with someone. Open up. Be vulnerable. Be human. Leave your
comfort zone. Get honest. Experience the fear. Do it anyway.
"Show me a guy who's afraid to look bad," said actor Rene Auberjonois,
"and I'll show you a guy you can beat every time."
The first time that I ever spoke to author and psychotherapist Devers
Branden it was over the telephone, and she agreed to work with me on
building my own self-confidence and personal growth. It wasn't long
into the phone conversation before she asked me about my voice.
"I am very interested in your voice," she said, with a tone of curiosity.
Hoping she might be ready to give me a compliment I asked her to
explain.
"Well," she said. "It's so lifeless. A real monotone. I wonder why that
is."
Embarrassed, I had no explanation. This conversation took place long
before I had become a professional speaker, and it was also long before
I ever took any acting lessons. It was long before I learned to sing in my
car, too. Yet I was completely unaware and very surprised that it
seemed to her that I was coming across with a voice like someone out of
Night of the Living Dead.
                                    page_54

Page 55
The truth was that during that period in my life, I was living scared.
Things weren't going well for me financially, I had serious health
problems in my family, and I had that mildly suicidal feeling that
accompanies an increasing sense of powerlessness over one's problems.
(I now think one way a lot of men hide their fears is by assuming a
macho kind of dull indifference. I know now that's what I had done.
That a psychotherapist could hear it immediately in my voice was
unnerving, though.)
Trying to understand why I covered fear with indifference, I
remembered that back in my high school the "cool" guys were always
the least enthusiastic guys. They spoke in monotones, emulating their
heroes James Dean and Marlon Brando. Brando was the coolest of all.
He was so indifferent and unenthusiastic you couldn't even understand
him when he spoke.
One of the first homework assignments Devers Branden gave me was to
rent the video Gone with the Wind and study how fearlessly Clark
Gable revealed his female side. This sounded weird to me. Gable a
female? I knew Gable was always considered a true "man's man" in all
those old movies, so I couldn't understand what Devers was talking
about, or how it would help me.
But when I watched the movie, it became strangely clear. Clark Gable
allowed himself such a huge emotional range of expression, that I could
actually identify scenes where he was revealing a distinctly female side
to his character's personality. Did it make him less manly? No.
Curiously, it made him more real, and more compelling.
From that time on, I lost my desire to hide myself behind an indifferent
monotonous person. I committed myself to get on the road to creating a
self that included
                                  page_55

Page 56
a wider range of expression, without a nervous preoccupation with
coming off like a man's man.
I also started noticing how much we seem to love vulnerability in others
but don't trust it in ourselves.
But we can learn to trust it!
Just a little at first. Then we can build that vulnerability until we're not
afraid to open up into an ever-widening spectrum of self-revelation. By
losing face, we connect to the real excitement of life. And what if I
don't always come off as an indifferent man's man? Frankly, my dear, I
don't give a damn.
22. Kill your television
My brother used to own a T-shirt store and one of the most popular
shirts for sale said, "Kill Your Television." I bought that T-shirt with the
picture of a TV being blown up. It still makes people nervous to look at
it when I wear it today.
You can actually change your life by turning off your television. Maybe
just one evening a week, to start with. What would happen if you
stopped trying to find life in other people's shows and let your own life
become the show you got hooked on?
Cutting down on television is sometimes terrifying to the electronically
addicted, but don't be afraid. You can detox slowly. If you're watching
too much television and you know it, you might find it useful to ask this
one question: "Which side of the glass do I want to live on?"
When you are watching television you are watching other people do
what they love doing for a living. Those people are on the smart side of
the glass, because they are having fun, and you are passively watching
them have fun. They are getting money, and you are not.
                                   page_56
Page 57
There's nothing wrong with occasionally watching other people do what
they love doing. But the average household now does this for seven
hours a day! Are they living on the side of the glass that will advance
their lives? (Big advertisers hope not.)
Here's a good test for you to determine if television motivates you more
than books do: Try to remember what you watched on television a
month ago. Think hard. What effect are those shows having on the
inspired side of your brain? Now think about the book that you read a
month ago. Or even the e-zine you read last week. Which made a more
valuable and lasting impression? Which form of entertainment better
leads you in the direction of self-motivation?
Today the growing fascination with going online is an improvement over
television, especially if you interact. Communicating inside thoughtful
chat rooms and sending and receiving e-mail both grow the brain.
Television does the opposite.
Groucho Marx once said he found television very educational. "Every
time someone turns it on," he said, "I go in the other room to read a
book."
23. Break out of your soul cage
Our society encourages us to seek comfort. Most products and services
advertised day and night are designed to make us more comfortable and
less challenged.
And yet, only challenge causes growth. Only challenge will test our
skills and make us better. Only challenge and the self-motivation to
engage the challenge will transform us. Every challenge we face is an
opportunity to create a more skillful self.
So it is up to you to constantly look for challenges to motivate yourself
with. And it's up to you to notice when
                                  page_57

Page 58
you're buried alive in a comfort zone. It's up to you to notice when you
are spending your life, in the image of the poet William Olsen, like a
flower "living under the wind."
Use your comfort zones to rest in, not to live in. Use them consciously
to relax and restore your energy as you mentally prepare for your next
challenge. But if you use comfort zones to live in forever, they become
what rock singer Sting calls your "soul cages." Break free. Fly away.
Experience what the philosopher Fichte meant when he said, "Being
free is nothing. Becoming free is heavenly."
24. Run your own plays
Design your own life's game plan. Let the game respond to you rather
than the other way around. Be like Bill Walsh, the former head coach of
the San Francisco 49ers. Everybody thought he was a kind of eccentric
because of how extensively he planned his plays in advance of each
game. Most coaches would wait to see how the game unfolded, then
respond with plays that reacted to the other team. Not Bill Walsh.
Walsh would pace the sidelines with a big sheet of plays that his team
was going to run, no matter what. He wanted the other team to respond
to him.
Walsh won a lot of Super Bowls with his unorthodox proactive
approach. But all he did was to act on the crucial difference between
creating and reacting.
You can create your own plans in advance so that your life will respond
to you. If you can hold the thought that at all times your life is either a
creation or a reaction, you can continually remind yourself to be
creating
                                 page_58

Page 59
and planning. "Creation" and "reaction" have the same letters in them,
exactly; they are anagrams. (Perhaps that's why people slip so easily out
of one and into the other.)
Many of us can spend whole days reacting without being aware of it.
We wake up reacting to news on the clock radio. Then we react to
feelings in our body. Then we start reacting to our spouses or our
children. Soon we get in the car and react to traffic, honking the horn
and using sign language. Then, at work, we see an e-mail on our
computer screen and react to that. We react to stupid customers and
insensitive bosses who are intruding on our day. During a break, we
react to a waitress at lunch.
This habit of reacting can go on all day, every day. We become goalies
in the hockey game of life, with pucks flying at us incessantly.
It's time to play another position. It's time to fly across the ice with the
puck on our own stick ready to shoot at another goal.
Robert Fritz, who has written some of the most profound and useful
books on the differences between creating and reacting, says, "When
your life itself becomes the subject matter of the creative process, a
very different experience of life opens to you—one in which you are
involved with life at its very essence."
Plan your day the way Bill Walsh planned his football games. See the
tasks ahead as plays you're going to run. You'll feel involved in your life
at its very essence, because you'll be encouraging the world to respond
to you. If you don't choose to do that, the life you get won't be an
accident. As an old Jewish folk saying puts it, "A person who does not
make a choice makes a choice."
                                 page_59

Page 60
25. Find your inner Einstein
The next time you see a picture of Albert Einstein, realize that that's
actually you. See Albert Einstein and say, "there I am."
Every human has the capacity for some form of genius. You don't have
to be good with math or physics to experience genius level in your
thinking. To experience Einstein's creative level of thinking, all you
have to do is habitually use your imagination.
This is a difficult recommendation for adults to follow, though, because
adults have become accustomed to using their imaginations for only one
thing: worrying. Adults visualize worst-case scenarios all day long. All
their energy for visualization is channeled into colorful pictures of what
they dread.
What they don't comprehend is that worry is a misuse of the
imagination. The human imagination was designed for better things.
People who use their imaginations to create with often achieve things
that worriers never dream of achieving, even if the worriers possess
much higher IQs. People who habitually access their imaginations are
often hailed by their colleagues as "geniuses"—as if "genius" was a
genetic characteristic. They would be better understood as people who
are practiced at accessing their genius.
Recognition of the power of this genius in all of us prompted Napoleon
to say, "Imagination rules the world."
As a child, you instinctively used your imagination as it was intended.
You daydreamed and made stuff up. You were a daydream believer by
day and in your right brain at night you sailed down a river of dreams.
                                  page_60

Page 61
If you go back into that state of self-confidence and dream again, you'll
be pleasantly surprised at how many innovative and immediate solutions
you come up with to your problems.
Einstein used to say, "Imagination is more important than knowledge."
When I first heard he'd said that, I didn't know what he meant. I always
thought additional knowledge was the answer to every difficult problem.
I thought if I could just learn a few more important things, then I'd be
okay. What I didn't realize was that the very thing I needed to learn was
not knowledge, but skill. What I needed to learn was the skill of
proactively using my imagination.
And once I'd learned that skill, the first task was to begin imagining the
vision of who I wanted to be. Songwriter Fred Knipe once wrote a song
about this. It was for the soundtrack of a video produced for teenagers
about how to visualize themselves succeeding at what they wanted to
do:
"That's you / in your wildest dreams / doing the wildest things / no one
else can do. If you / just love and keep those dreams / the wildest
dreams / you'll make yourself come true."
To make ourselves come true we need to develop the strength to dream.
Dreaming, in its proactive sense, is strong work. It's the design stage of
creating the future. It takes confidence and it takes courage. But the
greatest thing about active dreaming is not in the eventual reaching of
the goal—the greatest thing is what it does to the dreamer.
Forget the literal attainment of your dream for now. Focus on just going
for it. By simply going for the dream, you make yourself come true.
                                  page_61

Page 62
26. Run toward your fear
The world's best-kept secret is that on the other side of your fear there
is something safe and beneficial waiting for you. If you pass through
even a thin curtain of fear you will increase the confidence you have in
your ability to create your life.
General George Patton said, "Fear kills more people than death." Death
kills us but once, and we usually don't even know it. But fear kills us
over and over again, subtly at times and brutally at others. But if we
keep trying to avoid our fears, they will chase us down like persistent
dogs. The worst thing we can do is close our eyes and pretend they don't
exist.
"Fear and pain," says psychologist Nathaniel Branden, "should be
treated as signals not to close our eyes but to open them wider." By
closing our eyes we end up in the darkest of comfort zones—buried
alive.
Janis Joplin's biography, which chronicled her death from alcohol and
drug abuse, was aptly titled Buried Alive. To Janis, as to so many
similarly troubled people, alcohol provided an artificial and tragically
temporary antidote to fear. It is no accident that in the old frontier days
the nickname for whiskey was "false courage."
There was a time in my life, not too many years ago, when my greatest
fear of all was public speaking. It didn't even help that fear of speaking
in front of people was people's number one fear, even greater than the
fear of death. This fact once caused comedian Jerry Seinfeld to point
out that most people would rather be in the coffin than delivering the
eulogy.
For me, it ran even deeper than that. As a child I could not give oral
book reports. I'd plead with my teachers to let me off the hook. I would
offer to do two, even
                                page_62

Page 63
three written book reports if I didn't have to do the oral one.
Yet as my life went on, I wanted to be a public speaker more than
anything. My dream was to teach people everywhere to learn the ideas
that lead to self-motivation, the ideas that I had learned. But how could
I ever do this if stage fright left me frozen with fear?
Then one day as I was driving in Phoenix flipping through the radio
stations looking for good music, I accidentally happened upon a
religious station where a histrionic preacher was yelling, "Run toward
your fear! Run right at it!" I hastened to change the station, but it was
too late. Deep down I knew that I had just heard something I needed to
hear. No matter what station I turned to, all I could hear was that
madman's words: "Run toward your fear!"
The next day I still couldn't get it out of my mind, so I called a friend of
mine who was an actress. I asked her to help me get into an acting class
she had once told me about. I told her I thought I was ready to
overcome my fear of performing in front of people.
Although I lived in a high state of anxiety the first weeks of that class,
there was no other way around my fear. There was no real way to run
from it any longer, because the more I ran, the more pervasive it got. I
knew I had to turn around and run toward the fear or I would never
pass through it.
Emerson once said, "The greater part of courage is having done it
before," and that soon became true of my speaking in public. Fear of
doing it can only be cured by doing it. And soon my confidence was
built by doing it again and again.
The rush we get after running through the waterfall of fear is the most
energizing feeling in the world. If
                                    page_63

Page 64
you are ever in an undermotivated mood, find something you fear and
do it—and watch what happens.
27. Create the way you relate
We can't create our truest selves without creating relationships in the
process. Relationships are everywhere. Relationships are everything.
"There is no end to relationship," said the Indian spiritual leader
Krishnamurti. "There may be the end of a particular relationship, but
relationship can never end. To be is to be related."
I have trained many corporations with a four-part seminar series. The
first three parts are on self-motivation, and the final part is on
relationship building. Sometimes CEOs ask me up front, ahead of the
training, if I don't have that ratio out of balance.
"Shouldn't you have more of it be on relationship building?" they ask.
"After all, team-building and customer relations are surely more
important than self-motivation."
I stand by my ratio. We can't relate to others if our relationship with
ourselves is poor. A commitment to personal motivation comes first.
Because who wants to have a relationship with someone who is not
motivated in any way?
When we do get to the fourth part, relationship building, the focus is on
creativity. Creativity is the most neglected and yet most useful aspect of
relationship building.
In relationships most of us think with our emotions rather than our
minds. But to think with our feelings instead of our minds puts us in the
unresourceful state that Colin Wilson describes as being upside-down.
                                    page_64

Page 65
When we view relationships as opportunities for creativity, they always
get better. When our relationships get better, we are even more
motivated.
My youngest daughter, Margie, was in fourth grade when a very shy girl
in her class accidentally put a large black mark on her own nose with an
indelible marker. Many of the kids in the class pointed at her and started
to laugh. The little girl was finally reduced to tears of embarrassment.
At some point Margie walked over to the girl to give her some comfort.
(Margie's astonished teacher related this story to me.) Impulsively,
Margie picked up the marker and marked her own nose, and then
handed the marker to another classmate and said, "I like my nose this
way. What about you?"
In a few moments the entire class had black marks on their noses, and
the shy girl who was once crying was laughing. At recess, Margie's class
all went out on the playground with marked noses, and they were the
envy of the school—obviously into something unusual and "cool."
This story is interesting to me because of how Margie used her
creativity and her mind instead of her emotions to solve a problem. She
elevated herself up into her mind, where something clever could be
done. If she had used her feelings to think with, she might have
expressed anger at the class for laughing at the girl, or sadness and
depression.
Any time you take a relationship problem up into the mind, you have
unlimited opportunities to get creative. Conversely, when you send a
relationship problem down the elevator into the lower half of the heart,
you risk staying stuck in the problem forever.
                                 page_65

Page 66
This doesn't mean that you shouldn't feel anything. Feel everything!
Notice your feelings. Just don't think with them. When there's a
relationship problem to be solved, travel up your ladder to the most
creative you. You'll soon realize that we create the relationships we
have in our lives; they don't just happen.
"We are each of us angels with only one wing," said the Italian artist
Luciano de Crescenzo, "and we can only fly embracing each other."
28. Try interactive listening
The principle of using interactivity as a creativity-builder is not
restricted to computer games or chat rooms. Once we become fully
conscious of this principle, we can find ways to become more
interactive everywhere. We can even make conversations with our
family and friends more interactive than they once were.
We all have certain business associates or family members that we think
of as we do television sets. As they speak to us, we have a feeling that
we already know what they're going to say. This lowers our own
consciousness level, and a form of mental laziness sets in.
Whereas in the past we might have just passively suffered through other
people's monologues, we can now begin introducing more interactivity.
In the past we might have punctuated our sleepy listening with
meaningless words and phrases, such as "exactly" and "there you go,"
but we weren't truly listening. But that passive approach shortchanges
ourselves and the people we are listening to.
"When we are listened to," wrote Brenda Ueland, "it creates us, makes
us unfold and expand. Ideas actually begin to grow within us and come
to life."
                                  page_66

Page 67
The more thoughtful our questions get to be, the more interactive the
conversations. Look for opportunities for interactivity to motivate
yourself to higher levels of experience.
29. Embrace your willpower
I can't tell you how many people have told me that they have no
willpower. Do you think the same thing? If you think you have no
willpower, you are undermining your own success. Everyone has
willpower. To be reading this sentence, you must have willpower.
The first step in developing your willpower, therefore, is to accept its
existence. You have willpower just as surely as you have life.
If someone were to put a large barbell weight on the floor in front of
you and ask you to lift it and you knew you could not, you would not
say "I have no strength." You'd say, "I'm not strong enough."
Not strong "enough" is more truthful language, because it implies that
you could be strong enough if you worked at it. It also implies that you
do have strength.
It is the same with willpower. Of course you have willpower. When you
accept that little piece of chocolate cake, it is not because you have no
willpower. It is only because you choose not to exercise it in that
instance.
The first step toward building willpower is to celebrate the fact that
you've got it. You've got willpower, just like that muscle in your arm. It
might not be a very strong muscle, but you do have that muscle.
The second step is to know that your willpower, like a muscle in your
arm, is yours to develop. You are in charge of making it strong or letting
it atrophy. It is not
                                  page_67

Page 68
grown by random external circumstances. Willpower is a deliberate
volitional process.
When I left college to join the army, one of the reasons I decided to sign
up was because I thought it might help teach me to develop my
self-discipline. But somehow I had not been aware of the "self" in
self-discipline. I wanted discipline to be given to me by someone else. I
found out in boot camp that others do not give willpower and
self-discipline. The drill sergeant might have been persuasive and
inspiring (or at times terrifying), but he couldn't make me do anything
until I decided to do it. Nothing happened until I generated the will to
make it happen.
Make a promise to yourself to be clear and truthful about your own
willpower. It is always there.
30. Perform your little rituals
See yourself as a shaman or medicine man who needs to dance and sing
to get the healing started.
Make up a ritual that is yours and yours alone—a ritual that will be your
own shortcut to self-motivation.
As you read through these various ways to motivate yourself, you might
have noticed that action is often the key. Doing something is what leads
to doing something. It's a law of the universe: An object in motion stays
in motion.
The great basketball player Jack Twyman used to begin each practice
session by getting to the court early and taking 200 shots at the basket.
It always had to be 200 shots, which he counted out, and it didn't matter
if he already felt tuned up after 20 or 30 shots. He had to shoot 200. It
was his ritual, and it always got him into a state of self-motivation for
the rest of the practice session or game.
                                  page_68

Page 69
My friend Fred Knipe, now an Emmy award-winning television writer
and comedian, does something he calls "driving for ideas." When he has
a major creative project to accomplish, he gets in his car and drives
around the desert near Tucson until ideas begin to come to him. His
theory is that the act of driving gives the anxious, logical left side of his
brain something to do so the right side of his brain can be freed up to
suggest ideas. It's like giving your child some toys to play with so you
can read the evening e-mail on your computer.
In his book about songwriting, Write from the Heart, John Stewart
writes about composer and arranger Glenn Gould, who had a ritual for
finding a new melody or musical idea when he seemed to be stuck and
nothing was coming. He'd turn on two or three radios at the same time,
all to different stations. He'd sit and compose his own music while
listening to music on the three radios. This would short-circuit his
conscious mind and free up the creative subconscious. It would
overload the left side of his brain so the right could open up and create
without judgment.
My own ritual for jump-starting self-motivation is walking. Many times
in my life I have had a problem that seemed too overwhelming to do
anything about, and my ritual is to take the problem out for a long, long
walk. Sometimes I won't come back for hours. But time and again
during the course of my walks something comes out of nowhere—some
idea for an action that will quickly solve the problem.
One of the reasons I think this ritual works for me is that a ritual is
action. Starting a ritual is taking an action that leads toward finding the
solution. The dancing medicine man is already doing something.
Make up little rituals for yourself that will act as self-starters. They will
have you in action before you
                                    page_69

Page 70
"feel like" getting into action. Rituals always override your built-in
hesitation so that you can get yourself motivated in a predictable,
controllable way.
If you are not a writer or painter or poet, you might be thinking right
now that this does not apply to you. But that's what I would call the
creative fallacy. In fact, your entire life is yours to create. There are no
"creative" professions that stand apart from others, like an exclusive
club.
Martin Luther King Jr. used to say, "Be an artist at whatever you do.
Even if you are a street sweeper, be the Michelangelo of street
sweepers!"
31. Find a place to come from
Most people think they'll feel good once they reach some goal. They
think happiness is out there somewhere, perhaps not even too far away,
but out there all the same.
The problem with putting off feeling good about yourself until you hit a
certain goal is that it may never happen. And you know all the time
you're striving for it that it may never happen. So, by linking your
happiness to something you don't have yet, you're denying your power
to create happiness for yourself.
A lot of people use personal unhappiness as a tool, as proof of their own
sincerity and compassion. Yet, as Barry Kaufman points out eloquently
in To Love Is to Be Happy With, being unhappy is not necessary. You
can be happy and also be sincere. You can be happy and also be
compassionate. In fact, loving someone while you are unhappy does not
show up like love at all.
"Love," says the great American spiritual teacher, Emmet Fox, "acts the
part."
Songwriter Fred Knipe talked to me recently about how we human
beings have learned to use and abuse
                                   page_70

Page 71
unhappiness—he said he had made a list for me of the secret reasons
why people think they should feel bad.
"If I feel bad, then that proves I am a good person," he said. "Or, if I
feel bad, I am responsible. If I feel bad, I'm not hurting anybody. If I
feel bad, it means that I care. Maybe if I feel bad, it proves I'm being
realistic and aware. If I feel bad, it means I'm working on something."
That list gives us powerful motivation to be unhappy. But as Werner
Erhard (personal transformation pioneer) has always taught in his
well-known est seminars, happiness is a place to come from, not to try
to go to.
I once saw Larry King interviewing Werner Erhard by satellite from
Russia, where Erhard was living and working. Erhard had mentioned
that he might be moving back to the United States soon, and Larry King
asked him if coming home would make him happy.
Erhard paused uncomfortably, because in his view of life nothing makes
us happy. He finally said, "Larry, I am already happy. That wouldn't
make me happy, because I come from happiness to whatever I do."
Your happiness is your birthright. It shouldn't depend on your achieving
something. Start by claiming it and using it to make your self-motivation
fun all the way and not just fun at the end.
32. Be your own disciple
So, why do I claim we have no willpower? Is it a misguided desire to
protect myself? Is there a secret payoff in saying I have no willpower?
Maybe if I absolutely deny the existence of willpower, I am no longer
responsible for developing it. It's out of my life! What a relief!
But, here's the final tragedy: The development and use of willpower is
the most direct access to happiness
                                  page_71

Page 72
and motivation that I'll ever have. In short, by denying its existence, I'm
shutting my spirit down.
Many people think of willpower and self-discipline as something akin to
self-punishment. By giving it that negative connotation, they never get
enthused about developing it. But author William Bennett gives us a
different way to think of it. Self-discipline, he notes in The Book of
Virtues, comes from the word "disciple." When you are self-disciplined,
you have simply decided—in matters of the will—to become your own
disciple.
Once you make that decision, your life's adventure gets more
interesting. You start to see yourself as a stronger person. You gain
self-respect.
American philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson used to talk about the
Sandwich Island warriors who believed that when they killed an enemy
tribesman, the courage of that dead enemy passed into the warrior's
living body. Emerson said that the same thing happens to us when we
say no to a temptation. The power of that dead temptation passes into
us. It strengthens our will.
When we resist a small temptation, we take on a small power. When we
resist a huge temptation, we take on huge power.
William James recommended that we do at least two things every day
that we don't want to do—for the very reason that we don't want to do
them—just to keep will-power alive. By doing this, we maintain our
awareness of our own will.
33. Turn into a word processor
If you associate the word "willpower" with negative things, such as
harsh self-denial and punishment, you will
                                page_72

Page 73
weaken your resolve to build it. To increase your resolve, it's often
useful to think of new word associations.
To weight lifters, failure is success. Unless they lift a weight to the
point of "failure," their muscles aren't growing. So they have
programmed themselves, through repetition, to use the word "failure" in
a positive sense.
They also call what we would call "pain" something positive: "the
burn." Getting to "the burn" is the goal! You'll hear bodybuilders call
out to each other: "Roast 'em!" By consciously using motivated
language, they acquire access to inner power through the use of the
human will.
Zen philosopher and scholar Alan Watts also used to hate the word
"discipline" because it had so many negative connotations. Yet he knew
that the key to enjoying any activity was in the discipline. So he would
substitute the word "skill" for "discipline" and when he did that he was
able to develop his own self-discipline.
Language leads to power, so be conscious of the creative potential of
the language you use, and guide it in the direction of more personal
power.
34. Program your biocomputer
If you're a regular consumer of the major news programs, you belong to
a very persuasive and hypnotic cult. You need to be de-"programmed."
Start by altering how you listen to electronic radio gossip, the news, and
shock and schlock TV shows. Program out all the negative, cynical, and
skeptical thoughts that you now allow to flow into your mind unchecked
when you hear the news.
"Headless Woman Found in Topless Bar!"
That was an actual headline in a daily New York City newspaper. I used
to work for a city newspaper,
                                  page_73

Page 74
and I remember how hard the editors in the newsroom would search for
the most shocking stories they could find.
The news is not the news. It is the bad news. It is deliberate shock. The
more you accept it as the news, the more you believe that "that's the
way it is," and the more fearful and cynical you will become.
If we realized exactly how much vulgar, pessimistic, and manipulative
negativity was deliberately packed into every daily newspaper and most
television shows and Hollywood movies, we would resist the temptation
to flood our brains with their garbage. Most of us are more particular
about what we put in our automobile's gas tank than we are about what
we put in our own brain every night. We passively feed ourselves with
stories about serial killers and violent crime without any conscious
awareness of the choice we're making.
How do we change it? By worrying about it? No. Rather than fretting
about crime and apathy and whatever you wish would change in the
world, it's often very motivational to heed the words of Gandhi, who
said, "You must be the change you wish to see."
San Francisco writer and musician Gary Lachman wrote a captivating
essay called "World Rejection and Criminal Romantics" in which he
observed, "It's the Ted Bundys that get television coverage, not the
thousands of self-actualizers who work away at self-transformation
quietly and anonymously. And it's their influence, not that of the Ted
Bundys, that will shape the face of the coming century."
Often we don't have an opportunity to skip the media reports of crime
and scandal, so it's important that we listen in a way that always
programs out the effect. We are pretty good at doing this when we pass
the
                                   page_74

Page 75
tabloids in the grocery store checkout line. We smile at them even
before reading that aliens are living in the White House. We need to
take that same attitude toward what passes as "serious" media.
Once you've gotten good at factoring out the negative aspects of the
media today, take it a step further: Make your own news. Be your own
breaking story. Don't look to the media to tell you what's happening in
your life. Be what's happening.
35. Open your present
Practice being awake in the present moment. Make the most of your
awareness of this hour. Don't live in the past (unless you want guilt) or
worry about the future (unless you want fear), but stay focused on
today (in case you want happiness).
"Until you can put your attention where you want it," said Emmet Fox,
"you have not become master of yourself. You will never be happy until
you can determine what you are going to think about for the next hour."
There is a time for dreaming, planning, and creative goal setting. But
once you are complete with that, learn to live in the here and now. See
your whole life as being contained in this very hour. Let the microcosm
become the macrocosm. Live the words of the poet William Blake and
his description of enlightenment:
"To see a world in a grain of sand
and heaven in a wild flower
hold infinity in the palm of your hand
and eternity in an hour."
Sir Walter Scott said he would trade whole years filled with mindless
conformity for "one hour of life
                                 page_75

Page 76
crowded to the full with glorious action, and filled with noble risks."
It's amazing what can be done by people who learn to relax, pay
attention, and focus, appreciating the present hour and all the
opportunity it contains.
It is said that in America we try to cultivate an appreciation of art, while
the Japanese cultivate the art of appreciation. You, too, can cultivate
the art of appreciation. Appreciate this hour. This hour, right now, is
pure opportunity.
The great French philosopher Voltaire was on his deathbed when
someone asked him, "If you had 24 more hours to live, how would you
live them?" Voltaire said, "One at a time."
36. Be a good detective
In your professional life, whatever it is, always be curious. When you
meet with someone, think of yourself as a bumbling but friendly private
detective. Ask questions. Then ask follow-up questions. And then let
the answers make you even more curious. Let the answers suggest even
more questions. This will motivate you to higher levels of consciousness
and interest.
When you prepare a meeting with someone, prepare your questions.
Cultivate your curiosity. Don't ever be at a loss for questions to ask.
Most of us do the opposite. We prepare our answers. We rehearse what
we are going to say. We polish our presentation, and strengthen it, not
realizing that our host would much rather talk than listen to us.
If you are in business, you know that when prospective customers
contract for long-term services, they want a company that's truly
interested in them, that understands them, that will be a good consultant
to them. To
                                  page_76

Page 77
show a prospect that you are genuinely interested, you must be the
person who asks the most thoughtful questions. To convince a company
that you understand it, you will ask the best follow-up questions—based
on its answers. To convince a company that you will be a good
consultant to them over the course of the contract, you will have
out-learned your competitors by the inventiveness and quantity of your
questions. Your curiosity will get you the business. But you can't just
rely on impulsive, on-the-spot questioning. Being prepared is the secret.
Preparing your questions is even more important than preparing the
presentation of your services.
Indiana's former basketball coach Bobby Knight always said, "The will
to win is not as important as the will to prepare to win." This is not only
useful in business. If you are about to have an important conversation
with your spouse or teenager, it is very useful to prepare your curiosity
rather than your presentation.
When you prepare your curiosity, you always seem to have one more
question to ask before you leave, just like Lt. Columbo from the old TV
show now showing in reruns on cable. As the character played by Peter
Falk, Columbo disarmed his subjects by asking so many seemingly
impromptu questions. Like a disorganized but innocently charming
child, he would ask about the tiniest things. As he prepared to leave, he
always paused at the door, as if absent-mindedly remembering
something he forgot to ask. "Excuse me sir," he would say,
apologetically. "Would it inconvenience you if I asked you one more
question?"
Great relationship-builders ultimately learn that the sale most often goes
to the most interested party and the quantity and quality of your
questions will measure your level of interest. You might be thinking that
this
                                 page_77

Page 78
doesn't apply so much to you because you're not in business, or you
don't sell for a living. But heed the words of Robert Louis Stevenson:
"Everybody lives by selling something."
In Follow the Yellow Brick Road, Richard Saul Wurman writes about
physicist Isidor Isaac Rabi, who won a Nobel Prize for inventing a
technique that permitted scientists to probe the structure of atoms and
molecules in the 1930s. Rabi attributed his success in physics to the way
his mother used to greet him when he came home from school each day:
"Did you ask any good questions today, Isaac?"
By asking questions in your relationships, you are already creating the
relationship, and you are already self-motivated. You don't have to wait
for the other person to make it happen.
37. Make a relation-shift
Motivate yourself by giving someone else the ideas necessary for
self-motivation. You can have any experience you want in life simply
by giving that experience away to someone else. John Lennon called it
"instant karma."
In most of our relationships we stay focused on ourselves. We're
fascinated by how we're "coming off." We're constantly monitoring
what others must now be thinking of us. We live as if mirrors surround
us.
Norman Vincent Peale used to observe that shy people were the
greatest egomaniacs on earth, because they were so focused on
themselves. You can see that when you observe the body language of a
shy person. The looking down and turning in. The curling-up with
self-consciousness—as if surrounded by mirrors.
                                page_78

Page 79
When we shift our focus to the other person in the relationship,
something paradoxically powerful happens. By forgetting ourselves we
start to grow. I have developed an entire seminar around this one shift.
It is called "Relation-Shift."
Spencer Johnson, author of The One-Minute Sales Person, calls it "the
wonderful paradox: I have more fun, and enjoy more financial success,
when I stop trying to get what I want and start helping other people get
what they want."
If you want to be motivated, shift your inspiration to someone else.
Point out the strengths of the other individual to him or her. Offer
encouragement and support. Offer guidance in his or her own
self-motivation. Watch what it does for you.
38. Learn to come from behind
Progress toward your goals is never going to be a straight line. It will
always be a bumpy line. You'll go up and then come down a little. Two
steps forward and one step back.
There's a good rhythm in that. It is like a dance. There's no rhythm in a
straight line upward.
However, people get discouraged when they slide a step back after two
steps forward. They think they are failing, and that they've lost it. But
they have not. They're simply in step with the natural rhythm of
progress. Once you understand this rhythm, you can work with it
instead of against it. You can plan the step back.
In The Power of Optimism, Alan Loy McGinnis identifies the
characteristics of tough-minded optimists, and one of the most
important is that optimists always plan for renewal. They know in
advance that they are going
                                 page_79
Page 80
to run out of energy. "In physics," says McGinnis, "the law of entropy
says that all systems, left unattended, will run down. Unless new energy
is pumped in, the organism will disintegrate."
Pessimists don't want to plan for renewal, because they don't think there
should have to be any. Pessimists are all-or-nothing thinkers. They're
always offended when the world is not perfect. They think taking a step
backward means something negative about the whole project. "If this
were a good marriage, we wouldn't have to rekindle the romance," a
pessimist would say, dismissing the idea of taking a second honeymoon.
But an optimist knows that there will be ups and downs. And an
optimist isn't scared or discouraged by the downs. In fact, an optimist
plans for the downs, and prepares creative ways to deal with them.
You can schedule your own comebacks. You can look ahead on your
calendar and block out time to refresh and renew and recover. Even if
you feel very "up" right now, it's smart to plan for renewal. Schedule
your own comeback while you're on top. Build in big periods of time to
get away—even to get away from what you love.
If you catch yourself thinking that you are too old to do something you
want to do, recognize that you are now listening to the pessimistic voice
inside of you.
It is not the voice of truth.
You can talk back. You can remind the voice of all the people in life
who have started their lives over again at any age they wanted to. John
Housman, the Emmy award-winning actor in The Paper Chase, started
acting professionally when he was in his 70s.
I had a friend named Art Hill, who spent most of his life in advertising.
In his heart, however, he always wanted to be a writer. So in his late
50s, he wrote two books that got published by a small publishing house
in
                                  page_80

Page 81
Michigan. Then, when he was 60 years old, Hill had his first national
release with I Don't Care if I Never Come Back, a book about baseball
published by Simon and Schuster. The book was a popular and critical
success, and his dedication page is something I treasure above any
possession I own:
"To Steve Chandler—who cared about writing, cared about me, and one
day said, 'You should write a book about baseball.' "
Nobody cares how old you are but you. People only care about what
you can do, and you can do anything you want, at any age.
Dr. Monte Buchsbaum of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New
York has been one of many scientists conducting research into the
effects of aging on the brain. He is finding that it isn't aging that causes
a brain to become less sharp, it's simply lack of use.
"The good news is that there isn't much difference between a
25-year-old brain and a 75-year-old brain," said Buchsbaum, who used
his positron emission tomography laboratory to scan the brains of more
than 50 normal volunteers who ranged in age from 20 to 87.
The memory loss and mental passivity that we used to believe was
caused by aging has now been proven to be caused by simple lack of
use. The brain is like the muscle in your arm: When you use it, it gets
strong and quick. When you don't, it grows weak and slow.
Research at the UCLA Brain Research Institute shows that the circuitry
of the brain—the dendrites that branch between cells—grows with
mental activity.
"Anything that's intellectually challenging," said Arnold Scheibel, head
of the Institute, "can probably serve as a kind of stimulus for dendritic
growth, which means it adds to the computational reserves in the brain."
                                  page_81

Page 82
Translation: You can make yourself smarter.
"Whoever told you that you cannot increase your intelligence?" asks
Dr. Robert Jarvik, inventor of the artificial heart. "Whoever taught you
not to try? They didn't know. Flex your mind. Develop it. Use it. It will
enrich you and bring you the love of life that thrives on truth and
understanding."
Research shows that mathematicians live longer than people in any
other profession do, and we never used to know why. Now, in further
studies done at UCLA, there has been a direct connection established
between dendrite growth and longevity. Mental activity keeps you alive.
Lose your mental challenges, and life itself fades away.
Don't listen to the voice inside that talks about your age, or your IQ, or
your life history, or anything it can slow you down with. Don't be
seduced. You can start a highly motivated life right now by increasing
the challenges you give your brain.
39. Come to your own rescue
After a seminar I gave in Vancouver, Canada, Don Beach, the sales
manager of Benndorf Verster, one of that city's top businesses, sent me
a tape of a song that he wanted me to hear.
He said it reminded him of what I had been teaching his team about
self-esteem. The song was a live performance by the old folk-singing
duo, Sonny Terry and Brownie McGee. The song is called "Love, Truth
and Confidence." It's about how we foolishly chase after love and try to
discover the ultimate truth, while ignoring something much more vital to
our happiness: confidence.
                                 page_82

Page 83
The chorus of the song goes like this: "Love and truth / you can find /
any place, anywhere, any time / but you can just say 'so long' / once
confidence is gone / nothing matters anymore."
I never knew the true power of self-confidence until I began working
with Dr. Nathaniel Branden and his wife Devers Branden. Both are
authors and psychotherapists with the Branden Institute for
Self-Esteem, and they have provided me with the most powerful
insights I've ever received into how I operate as a human being.
Dr. Branden's book, The Six Pillars of Self-Esteem, is unlike any other
psychology book on the market, because in addition to its eloquently
written philosophy on how to build inner strength, it also contains a full
year's worth of practical, powerful, user-friendly exercises to raise your
own consciousness and self-esteem. His sentence-completion exercises
are so effective and exciting that if you do them, I can say without a
trace of exaggeration, you can get tens of thousands of dollars worth of
personal growth therapy for the price of a single book.
Before you assume that Branden's notion of self-esteem is the same as
that being bandied about by New-Age educators, you must read his
work and listen to his tapes. Most people today think others can bestow
self-esteem on us. Such misguided thinking leads to phenomena such as
classes without grades and work without standards for excellence.
Perhaps you have heard about that Little League group in Pennsylvania
that wanted to eliminate keeping score from baseball games because of
the damage that losing does to children's self-esteem.
When we confuse pampering and coddling with instilling self-esteem,
we really encourage the upbringing of young, sensitive children who
have no inner strength
                                  page_83

Page 84
whatsoever. When it comes time for such overpraised, underachieving
kids to find success in the competitive global marketplace, they will be
confused, fearful, and ineffective.
The concepts taught by Nathaniel and Devers Branden are intellectually
ruthless and unsentimental. Some of the best ideas go all the way back
to Branden's years working with the great novelist and objectivist
philosopher Ayn Rand.
The Brandens have taught me how to objectively explore the
weaknesses in my own thinking and to challenge the self-deception that
was undermining my effectiveness in life.
"To trust one's mind and to know that one is worthy of happiness is the
essence of self-esteem," writes Dr. Branden. "The value of self-esteem
lies not merely in the fact that it allows us to feel better, but that it
allows us to live better—to respond to challenges and opportunities
more resourcefully and appropriately."
The two ideas contained in the Brandens' work that have most helped
me are: 1) "You can't leave a place you've never been"; and 2) "No one
is coming."
I used to believe that I could run from all my frightening thoughts and
beliefs about myself. But all that ever did was create deeper internal
fears and conflicts. What I really needed was to get all my fears into the
sunshine and demystify them. Once I systematically began to do that, I
was able to dismantle those fears, as a bomb squad dismantles a bomb.
Acceptance and full consciousness of those fears—and the
self-sabotaging behavior they led to—was "the place I had never been."
Once I was in that place, I could leave.
                                   page_84

Page 85
The notion that "no one is coming" was somehow terrifying to accept.
The idea that no one was going to rescue me from my circumstances is
an idea that I might never have accepted. That idea sounded too much
like the final abandonment. It contradicted all my childhood
self-programming. (Many of us, even as grown-ups, devise very
elaborate and subtle variations on the "I want my mommy" theme.) The
Brandens showed me that I could be much happier and more effective if
I valued independence and self-responsibility above dependency on
someone else.
When you accept the idea that "no one is coming" it is actually a very
powerful moment, because it means that you are enough. No one needs
to come. You can handle your problems yourself. You are, in a larger
sense, appropriate to life. You can grow and get strong and generate
your own happiness.
And paradoxically, from that position of independence, truly great
relationships can be built, because they aren't based on dependency and
fear. They are based on mutual independence and love.
Once, in a group therapy session, a client of Dr. Branden's challenged
him on his principle that "no one is coming." "But Nathaniel," the client
said, "it's not true. You came!"
"Correct," admitted Dr. Branden, "but I came to say that no one is
coming."
40. Find your soul purpose
How do you know what your true life is? Or what your soul's purpose
is? How do you know how to live this purpose? The answers to these
questions are yours for the taking, but you must seize the answers and
not wait to be given them. No one will give you the answers.
                                 page_85

Page 86
One good clue as to whether you are living your true life is how much
you fear death. Do you fear death a lot, just a little, or not at all?
"When you say you fear death," wrote David Viscott, "you are really
saying that you fear you have not lived your true life. This fear cloaks
the world in silent suffering."
When mythologist Joseph Campbell recommended that we "follow our
bliss," many people misunderstood him. They thought he meant to
become a pleasure-seeker, a selfish hedonist from the "me generation."
Instead, he meant that in order to find out what your true life could be,
you should look for clues in whatever makes you happy.
What gets you excited? In the answer to that question, you'll discover
where you can be of most service. You can't live your true life if you're
not serving people, and you can't serve people very well if you are not
excited about what you're doing.
What makes you happy? (I know I already asked, but the fear that
"cloaks the world in silent suffering" comes from not asking that
question enough times.)
In my own professional life I have finally found that teaching makes me
happy, writing makes me happy, and performing makes me happy. It
took me many years of unhappiness to finally reach the point of despair
necessary to ask the question: What makes me happy?
I was the creative director for an ad agency and I was making a good
deal of money producing commercials, meeting with clients, and
designing marketing strategies. I could have done this type of work
forever, but my horrible fear of death was my clue that I was not living
my true life.
                                 page_86

Page 87
"People living deeply," wrote Anaïs Nin, "have no fear of death." I was
not living deeply. And it took me a long time to get clear answers to my
question: What makes me happy? But any question we ask ourselves
often enough will eventually yield the right answer. The problem is, we
quit asking.
Fortunately for me, in this rare instance of persistence in the face of
extreme discomfort, I didn't quit asking. The answer came to me in the
form of a memory—so colorful it was almost like a movie scene. I was
driving at night in my car 10 years earlier, and I was as happy as I had
ever been. In fact, I was driving around aimlessly so that I could keep
my feeling of happiness preserved and contained within that car—I
didn't want anything to interrupt it. It was so profound that it lasted for
hours.
The occasion had been a speech I had just given. The subject of it was
my recovery from an addiction, and the night that I spoke I was running
such a high fever, and I had such a fear of speaking in public that I tried
to call the talk off. My hosts wouldn't hear of it.
Somehow I made it to the podium and, probably because my fever and
flu were so intense, I spoke freely, without caution or
self-consciousness. The more I spoke about freedom from addiction, the
more excited I got. My creativity just soared. I remember the audience
laughing as I spoke. I remember them jumping to their feet and cheering
when I was finished. It was the most remarkable night of my life.
Somehow I had reached people in a way I'd never reached people
before, and their own expressions of joy lifted me higher than I had ever
been.
It was that memory of that moonlit night, driving in my car, that came
back to me 10 years later after I'd
                                  page_87

Page 88
spent weeks repeating to myself the question, "What makes me happy?"
Now I had the picture, but I had no idea how to act on it. But at least I
knew what my true life was, and I knew that I wasn't living it.
Then one day one of my major advertising clients asked me to hire a
motivational speaker for a big breakfast meeting they were having for
their sales staff. I didn't know of anyone in Arizona who was any
good—the only motivational speakers I was familiar with were the
national ones whose tapes I'd listened to so often in my car, people such
as Wayne Dyer, Tom Peters, Anthony Robbins, Alan Watts, and
Nathaniel Branden. But Alan Watts was dead—and the rest were
probably far too expensive for our little breakfast.
So I called Kirk Nelson, a friend of mine who was sales manager at
KTAR in Phoenix, and asked his advice. "The only person in Arizona
worth hiring is Dennis Deaton," he said. "He speaks all over the
country, and he's usually booked, but if you can get him, do, because
he's great."
I finally reached Deaton in Utah, where he was giving seminars on time
management. He agreed to come back to Phoenix in time for our
breakfast and give a 45-minute motivational talk.
Kirk Nelson was right. Deaton was impressive. He held the audience
spellbound as he told stories that illustrated his ideas about the power
that people have over their thoughts, and the mastery that they can
achieve over their thinking. When he finished speaking and came back
to the table where we had been sitting, I shook his hand and thanked
him, and I found myself making a silent vow that someday soon I would
be working with this man.
It wasn't long after that that he and I were indeed working together. It
was at a company called Quma
                                   page_88

Page 89
Learning, Deaton's corporate training facility based in Phoenix,
Arizona. Although I began with Quma as its marketing director
—creating advertisements, video scripts, and direct-mail pieces—I soon
worked my way up to the position of seminar presenter.
My first big thrill came when Deaton and I were both invited to speak at
a national convention of carpet-cleaning companies. It was the first time
I had ever shared the stage with him, and I was to go on first. He was in
the audience when I spoke, and I have to admit I had worked harder
than I'd ever worked in my life in preparation for this event.
The participants had heard Deaton before at previous conventions and
loved him, but they'd never heard me. After my presentation was over,
they clapped enthusiastically and as Deaton passed me on his way to
the stage he was beaming with pride as he shook my hand. (Unlike
myself, Dennis Deaton has very little professional jealousy of other
speakers. He was happy for my success. I have to admit that my
favorite moment occurred when, after he was introduced, someone in
the audience teasingly shouted out, "Dennis who?")
Many people get confused and believe that living their true life means
getting lucky and finding a suitable job with an appreciative boss
somewhere. What I have come to realize is that you can live your true
life anywhere, in any job, with any boss.
First find out what makes you happy, and then start doing it. If writing
makes you happy, and you're not writing for a living, start up a
company newsletter or your own Web site. When I first realized that
speaking and teaching made me happy, I started a free weekly
workshop. I didn't wait until something was offered to me.
                                 page_89

Page 90
Whatever goal you want to reach, you can reach it 10 times faster if
you are happy. In my sales training and consulting, I notice that happy
salespeople sell at least twice as much as unhappy salespeople. Most
people think that the successful salespeople are happy because they are
selling more and making more money. Not true. They are selling more
and making more money because they are happy.
As J.D. Salinger's character Seymour says in Fanny and Zooey, "This
happiness is strong stuff!" Happiness is the strongest stuff in the world.
It is more energizing than a cup of hot espresso on a cold morning. It is
more mind-expanding than a dose of acid. It is more intoxicating than a
glass of champagne under the stars.
If you refuse to cultivate happiness in yourself, you will not be of
extraordinary service to others, and you will not have the energy to
create who you want to be. There is no goal better than this one: to
know as you lie on your deathbed that you lived your true life because
you did what made you happy.
41. Get up on the right side
Since I was a child, I've always been intrigued with the idea that you
could have a great day just by getting up on the right side of the bed.
Later in life, during my years as a largely unsuccessful songwriter, one
of the few successes I had was with a country rock song that I co-wrote
with Fred Knipe and Duncan Stitt. It was called "The Right Side of the
Wrong Bed."
Today my fascination is not so much with the right side of the bed as it
is with the right side of the head—or to be more precise, the right side
of the brain.
In the 1930s, brain surgeons discovered the different functions of the
two halves of the brain while working
                                  page_90

Page 91
with epileptics. In 1950, Roger W. Sperry of the University of Chicago
(and later of Cal Tech) made the greatest breakthroughs in discovering
that dreams, energy, and creative insight come from the right side of the
brain, while linear, logical, short-term, and shortsighted thinking come
from the left.
The best explanation of how "whole-brain" thinking surpasses left-brain
thinking or right-brain thinking is in a book written by British
philosopher Colin Wilson called Frankenstein's Castle. Wilson reveals
that we have more control over drawing vital energy and creative ideas
from the "right brain" than we ever realized. And what stimulates the
right brain the most is a high sense of purpose.
If you had to carry a heavy sack of sand across town, your left brain
might get upset and tell you that you were doing something boring and
tedious. However, if your child were injured badly and she weighed the
same as the huge bag of sand, you'd carry her the same distance to the
hospital with a surprising surge of vital energy (sent from the right
brain). That's what purpose does to the brain. Self-motivation gets more
and more exciting as the left brain gets better and better at telling the
right brain what to do.
42. Let your whole brain play
Suicide rates go down during times of war because many people begin
to feel useful and challenged enough times during the day. This
encourages them to us both sides of the brain harmonically. In less
eventful times, people tend to slip into using just one side of the brain
and get trapped into feeling useless.
Most people unconsciously wait for an external crisis, such as a
threatened bankruptcy or an attack on the
                                 page_91

Page 92
street or the burning down of their home or an unwanted divorce, or a
war, to kick in their whole-brain thinking.
But that passive misuse of the brain leads to a life of reaction rather
than creation. When Oliver Wendell Holmes said "most people go to
their graves with their music still in them," he just as easily could have
said that most people live in their left brain only. When Thoreau said
"most men lead lives of quiet desperation," he was describing what life
is like if you stay trapped in left, linear, short-sighted thinking.
But the irony is that the left brain has gotten an unfairly negative
reputation, simply because people stay trapped there. When people
learn that the left brain is there to connect with the right, then it takes
on new power and function. When people stay trapped in linear, flat,
and logical left-brain thinking and never activate the creative right side
of the brain, they lose their love of life. The right brain comes alive
during dreaming at night while the left brain sleeps. But it is possible (as
artists, poets, and saints can attest) to have the same two-sided interplay
that we had as children, while we are awake. We simply have to fire it
up by using the left brain to call on the right. This is what happens when
we make love, play games, write poetry, hold a baby, or face a
threatening crisis: The left brain commands the right brain to come alive
and get involved. That is when you get whole brain thinking, or what
psychologist Abraham Maslow called "peak" experiences.
The three best ways to activate whole-brain thinking are through 1)
goal-visualization, 2) joyful work, and 3) revitalizing play. Rather than
wait for external crises to appear, create internal challenge games of
your own—goals and purposes—that lead you in growth toward the
motivated person you want to become.
                              page_92

Page 93
The real excitement in studies of the power of the right brain lies in its
suggestion of a neurological basis for personal transformation. It's not
just motivational puff or secular evangelism to say that we possess
unlimited creative energy, and we can use it to create the lives we want.
"In fact," writes Colin Wilson, "we can learn to live on a far, far higher
level of power. And that is what the left brain was intended for. Its
farsightedness gives it the ability to summon power. Yet it hardly makes
use of this ability. It could be compared to a man who possesses a magic
machine that will create gold coins so that he could, if he wanted, pay
off the national debt and abolish poverty. But he is so lazy and stupid
that he never bothers to make more than a couple of coins every
day—just enough to see him through until the evening...or perhaps he is
not lazy: only afraid of emptying the machine. If so, the fear is
unnecessary. It is magical, and cannot be emptied."
Most people regard their right brain with a sense of wonder. They think
inspiring thoughts "came to them" out of the blue. "Last night I had the
strangest dream!" they will say, not knowing how much control they
really have over that magical machine.
43. Get your stars out
Terry Hill is a writer who has lived all over the world and has been a
friend of mine since we met each other in the sixth grade in
Birmingham, Michigan. His short story, "Cafes Are for Handicapping,"
features an intriguing character named Joe Warner who liked to tell
stories about horse racing.
                                   page_93

Page 94
Joe Warner told the story of being in the press box at Belmont when
Secretariat put away the Triple Crown by 31 lengths.
"And I looked beside me when he was coming down the stretch at all
these hardened, cigar-chomping New York newspapermen and they all
had tears running down their cheeks like little babies. 'Course I couldn't
see too clear myself for the tears in my eyes. I was 23 at the time. And
it was the first Triple Crown in my lifetime. Imagine that."
That story brought me even closer to a question I've been asking all my
life. Why do we cry when we see huge accomplishments? Why do we
cry at weddings? Why do I cry when the blind girl jumps with her horse
in the movie Wild Hearts Can't Be Broken? Or when the Titans win the
game in Denzel Washington's Remember the Titans? Why did those
sportswriters cry to see that horse win by 31 lengths?
This is my theory: We weep for the winner inside of all of us. In these
poignant moments, we cry because we know for a fact that there is
something in us that could be every bit as great as what we are
watching. We are, for that moment, the untapped greatness we are
seeing. But we get tears in our eyes, because we know the greatness
isn't being realized. We could have been like that, but we aren't.
Terry Hill also gives public talks on creativity. His own work in
advertising and public relations throughout the years has won countless
awards and, as one might expect, he presents some learned and
sophisticated formulae for "creating." But he finishes all his talks by
saying it is really a simple thing to be creative—all you do is "get your
stars out." That's how you tap into the untapped you.
                                   page_94

Page 95
His reference is to Seymour: An Introduction by J.D. Salinger. Seymour
is writing a letter to his brother Buddy, who has chosen to become a
professional writer. Seymour tells his brother that writing has always
been more than a profession, that it has been more like Buddy's religion.
He says that Buddy will be asked two very profound questions when he
dies about the writing he was doing: 1) "Were most of your stars out?";
and 2) "Were you busy writing your heart out?"
Terry Hill's advice to his audiences on the subject of creativity is to
make sure you "get your stars out." This is another way of saying let the
stars that are in you shine freely. Don't force them out. Just let them
shine.
Although Hill's audiences are usually advertising people and writers, his
recommendations apply to all of us. Our lives are ours to create. Do we
want to create them in a lackluster way or do we want to be inspiring?
When we write our plans and dreams, we need to write our hearts out.
In shooting for the stars, it's time to get a bit wild. Wild hearts can't be
broken.
44. Just make everything up
Sometimes in my seminars I will ask the people in the audience to raise
their hands if they think of themselves as "creative." I've never had
more than a fourth of the audience raise their hands.
I then ask the people how many of them were able to make things up
when they were younger—make up names for their dolls, make up a
game to play, make up a story for their parents when the truth looked
less promising.
All hands go up.
So, what's the difference? You made stuff up as a child, but you're not a
creative adult? The difference is
                                 page_95

Page 96
that we have charged the word "creative" with meaning something truly
extraordinary. Picasso was creative. Meryl Streep is creative. Wyclef
Jean is creative. But me?
So one of the ways to get started creating goals and action plans is to
just "make them up," like you did as a kid. Think of creating in simpler
terms. Think of it as something all humans do very easily. French
psychologist Emile Coue said, "Always think of what you have to do as
easy and it will be."
45. Put on your game face
I used to hate to study for tests in high school. Nothing could have been
more boring. But one day Terry Hill and I decided to make a game of it.
We decided to challenge each other by making up mock tests for each
other. The only rules were that we had to ask 30 questions, and the
answers had to appear in the text that we were going to be tested on in
the classroom the next day.
Because we were both competitive and loved games, we worked very
hard to come up with the most ridiculously difficult questions we could
devise. "What was Magellan's middle name?" "How many of Custer's
children were daughters?" "What is the 23rd word in the Gettysburg
Address?" We also tried to anticipate the other's toughest questions and
learn the obscure answers.
On the morning of the real test we presented each other with our own
tests, always twice as hard as the real test. As we each took each other's
test there was much happy yelling and laughter. But by the time we
took the real test in school, we were more than ready. In fact, we often
looked across the classroom at each other during the real test and rolled
our eyes with disdain at the simplicity and stupidity of the real exam.
                                   page_96

Page 97
By changing our study into a challenging game, we had taken the
"work" out of the task and replaced it with play. Did we work as hard?
Harder! But by transforming work into play, we increased our energy
and our sense of creativity.
Most people who play a lot of golf or tennis work much harder at their
games than they do at work. All people work harder at play than they
do at work, because there's no resistance. Golfers are working harder on
the golf course than they are at their professions. They don't always
know this (although their spouses usually do) because it doesn't feel like
work—it feels like fun. They bring more energy, innovation, and zest to
what they're doing out on the course because it's a game. They also
bring an ongoing commitment to increasing their skills. Everyone is
interested in getting better at the games they play.
As for the effect of games on energy, consider a bunch of guys playing
poker all night. Because poker is a game, people can play it all night
until the sun comes up. When they finally come home to sleep, you
might be tempted to ask them, "How did you manage to stay up all
night? Were you drinking coffee and cokes?" No, they confess, they
were drinking beer. "But shouldn't beer slow you down and make you
tired?" Not if you are playing a game! In fact, you'll also learn that they
were probably smoking cigars and eating junk snacks as well. Not
generally known as stimulants. What was stimulating was the game. The
joy of competition.
Playwright Noel Coward once said, "Work is more fun than fun." I
included that quote in a seminar guidebook for a sales group a year ago
and one of the participants in the back of the room raised his hand and
said, "Yeah, Steve, who is this Noel Coward guy? I figure with
                                   page_97

Page 98
a quote like that he's either a porn star or a professional golfer."
That line got a great laugh at my expense, but it also revealed a truth
(which almost all humor does). People believe that the fun jobs are
always somewhere else. "If only I could get a job like that!" "If only I
had been a pro golfer." But the truth is that fulfilling and fun work can
be found in anything. The more we consciously introduce game-playing
elements (personal bests listed, goals, time limits, competition with self
or others, record-keeping, etc.) the more fun the activity becomes.
I recently worked on a project with a young man in Phoenix who was
selling three times as much office equipment as the average salesperson
on his team. He said he didn't understand his co-workers who got
depressed easily, took rejection hard, and struggled with putting their
deals together.
"I don't take this that seriously," he smiled. "I love all my sales
challenges. The tougher the prospect is, the more fun I have selling.
There is absolutely nothing personal or depressing in any of this for me.
When I meet a new sales prospect, it's a chess game."
Whatever it is you have to do, whether it's a major project at work, or a
huge cleaning job at home, turning it into a game will always bring you
higher levels of energy and motivation.
46. Discover active relaxation
There is a huge difference between active relaxation and passive
relaxation. When we play video games, play computer games, play
cards, work in the garden, walk the dog, go into a chat room, or play
chess, we are interacting with the unexpected, and our minds are
responding. All
                                 page_98

Page 99
of these activities increase personal creativity and intellectual
motivation. They are all active pursuits.
Active relaxation refreshes and restores the mind. It keeps it flexible
and toned for thinking. Great thinkers have known this secret for a long
time. Winston Churchill used to paint to relax. Albert Einstein played
the violin. They could relax one part of the brain while stimulating
another. When they returned to workday pursuits they were fresher and
sharper than ever.
Most of us try to deaden the mind in order to relax. We rent mindless
videos, read pulp fiction, drink, smoke, and eat until we're foggy and
bloated. The problem with this form of relaxation is that it dulls our
spirit and makes it hard to come back to consciousness.
I accidentally discovered the restorative powers of video and computer
games when I played some with my then-9-year-old son Bobby. What
began as a way to make him happy and spend time with him became a
brain-challenging pursuit. The complexity of computer football,
basketball, and hockey games now rivals chess and The New York
Times Sunday crossword puzzle. It requires stimulating recreational
thinking.
"Thinking is the hardest work we do," said Henry Ford, "which is why
so few people ever do it." But when we find ways to link thinking to
recreation, our lives get richer. We become players in the game of life
and not just spectators.
47. Make today a masterpiece
Most of us think our lives accumulate. We think they are adding up to
something. We think of our lives as being strung together like a long
smoky train, so that we can add new freight cars when we're feeling
right,
                                  page_99

Page 100
and dump the others on a siding somewhere when we're not.
But when basketball legend John Wooden's father said to him, "Make
each day your masterpiece," Wooden knew something profound: Life is
now. Life is not later on. And the more we hypnotize ourselves into
thinking we have all the time in the world to do what we want to do, the
more we sleepwalk past life's finest opportunities. Self-motivation flows
from the importance we attach to today.
John Wooden was the most successful college basketball coach of all
time. His UCLA teams won 10 national championships in a 12-year
time span. Wooden created a major portion of his coaching and living
philosophy from one thought—a single sentence passed on to him by his
father when Wooden was a little boy— "Make each day your
masterpiece."
While other coaches would try to gear their players toward important
games in the future, Wooden always focused on today. His practice
sessions at UCLA were every bit as important as any championship
game. In his philosophy, there was no reason not to make today the
proudest day of your life. There was no reason not to play as hard in
practice as you do in a game. He wanted every player to go to bed each
night thinking, "Today I was at my best."
Most of us, however, don't want it to be this way. If someone asks us if
today can be used as a model to judge our entire life by, we would
shriek, "On no! It isn't one of my better days. Give me a year or two and
I'll live a day, I'm certain of it, that you can use to represent my life."
The key to personal transformation is in your willingness to do very tiny
things—but to do them today.
                                     page_100

Page 101
Transformation is not an all-or-nothing game, it's a work in progress. A
little touch here and a small touch there is what makes your day (and,
therefore, your life) great. Today is a microcosm of your entire life. It is
your whole life in miniature. You were "born" when you woke up, and
you'll "die" when you go to sleep. It was designed this way, so that you
could live your whole life in a day.
48. Enjoy all your problems
Every solution has a problem.
You can't have one without the other. So why do we say that we hate
problems? Why do we claim to want a hassle-free existence? When
someone is emotionally sick, why do we say, "He's got problems"?
Deep down, where our wisdom lives, we know that problems are good
for us. When my daughter's teacher talks to me during open house and
tells me that my daughter is going to be "working more problems" in
math than she worked last year, I think that's wonderful. Why do I think
it's wonderful when my daughter gets more problems to solve, if I think
problems are a problem?
Because somehow we know that problems are good for our children. By
solving problems, our kids will become more self-sufficient. They'll trust
their own minds more. They'll see themselves as problem-solvers.
Because we ourselves are so superstitious about our own problems, we
tend to run from them rather than solve them. We have demonized
problems to such a degree that they are like monsters that live under the
bed. And by not solving them during the day, we tremble over them at
night.
                                page_101

Page 102
When people took their problems to the legendary insurance giant W.
Clement Stone, he used to shout out, "You've got a problem? That's
great!" It's a wonder he wasn't shot by someone, given our culture's
deep superstition about problems.
But problems are not to be feared. Problems are not curses. Problems
are simply tough games for the athletes of the mind and true athletes
always long to get a game going.
In The Road Less Traveled, one of M. Scott Peck's central themes is
that "problems call forth our wisdom and our courage."
One of the best ways to approach a problem is in a spirit of play, the
same way you approach a chess game or a challenge to play one-on-one
playground basketball. One of my favorite ways to play with a problem,
especially one that seems hopeless, is to ask myself, "what is a funny
way to solve this problem? What would be a hilarious solution?" That
question never fails to open up fresh new avenues of thought.
"Every problem in your life," said Richard Bach, author of Illusions,
"carries a gift inside it." He is right. But we have to be thinking that way
first, or the gift will never appear.
In his groundbreaking studies of natural healing, Dr. Andrew Weil
suggests that we even regard illness as a gift. "Because illness can be
such a powerful stimulus to change," he writes in Spontaneous Healing,
"perhaps it is the only thing that can force some people to resolve their
deepest conflicts. Successful patients often come to regard it as the
greatest opportunity they ever had for personal growth and
development—truly a gift. Seeing illness as a misfortune, especially one
that is undeserved, may obstruct the healing system. Coming to
                                    page_102

Page 103
see the illness as a gift that allows you to grow may unlock it."
If you see your problems as curses, the motivation you're looking for in
life will be hard to find. If you learn to love the opportunities your
problems present, then your motivational energy will rise.
49. Remind your mind
Perhaps you have noted an idea in this book, or another recent book
that you've read, that you want to hold on to. It might be an idea that
you knew, the moment you saw it, would always be useful to you. You
might even have underlined it for future reference.
But what if the book goes on the shelf, or gets loaned to a friend, and is
forevermore out of sight and out of mind? This is a very common
experience, and there is a remedy: Start treating self-motivational ideas
as if they were songs.
You can find ways to rewind these ideas so they'll play again and again
until you can't get them out of your head. That's how belief systems are
restructured to suit our goals. Place the thought you want to remember
into the jingle track in your brain so that it can't get out.
You can create a new self by learning the beliefs you want to live
by—one thought at a time. Learn these thoughts as you would the lyrics
for a song you had to perform on stage. A friend of mine used to learn
his parts in musicals by placing index cards with song lyrics all over his
office, home, and bathroom mirror. He sometimes had them on the
dashboard of his car. Why? He was making a conscious visual effort to
reach the backside of his own mind.
                                  page_103

Page 104
The trick is to keep this motivation going. To deliberately feed your
spirit with the optimistic ideas you want to live by. Any time a thought,
sentence, or paragraph inspires you or opens up your thinking, you need
to capture it, like a butterfly in a net, and later release it into your own
field of consciousness.
For me, discovering an exciting idea in a book or magazine is like a true
peak experience. It makes the world bright and incomprehensible. I get
that tingle in my spine. I get that "Oh, yes!" feeling. Why am I this
lucky? And the more I deliberately fill my mind with the words and
phrases that originally stirred the peak experience, the easier it is to
remember that life is good.
"This," writes Colin Wilson in New Pathways in Psychology, "is why
people who have a peak experience can go on repeating them: because
it is simply a matter of reminding yourself of something you have
already seen and which you know to be real. In this sense, it is like any
other 'recognition' that suddenly dawns on you—for example, the
recognition of the greatness of some composer or artist whom you had
formerly found difficult or incomprehensible, or the recognition of how
to solve a certain problem. Once such a recognition 'dawns' it is easy to
reestablish contact with it, because it is there like some possession,
waiting for you to return to it."
During my talks on self-motivation, one of the questions I'm asked most
often is "How do I keep this going?" People say, "I love what I've
learned today, but I've often gone to seminars that got me motivated
and then a few days later I was back to my old pessimistic self, doing
exactly what I used to do."
If I were in the mood to be blunt, I would answer the question this way:
Why, if you love what you've learned
                                  page_104

Page 105
about self-motivation, would you ask me how to keep it going in your
life? The person in this room best equipped to answer your question is
you. So I'll ask you, "How will you keep this going in your life?" I bet
you could give me 10 ways you could do it. And I bet that if this were a
foreign language you had to learn you would set aside a certain amount
of time each day to review it, to read it out loud, and to make certain
you learned it. I bet you'd buy tapes or CDs for your car and even
arrange small study groups. So the real question is this: Is mastering the
art of motivation as important as learning another language?
Even a single phrase, placed prominently in a home or office, can have
a huge impact on your life. In Arnold Schwarzenegger's childhood home
in a poor town in Austria, his father framed and hung the simple words,
"Joy Through Strength." It's not hard to see what effect that idea had on
Arnold's life.
Once while I was attending a Werner Erhard seminar, I had some free
time during a break so I wrote myself a letter. I put down all the ideas I
wanted to remember from the seminar and I sealed them in an envelope.
I took it home and a month later I mailed it to myself. When I opened it
at work and read it, it was like a fresh experience all over again.
I was so impressed by how effective this was for me that I employed the
idea in one of my own seminars. I had everyone in the audience write
out the important insights they'd received and what they intended to do
differently in their lives from this moment on. When the people were
finished, I asked them to seal the letters into the envelopes I'd provided
and address the envelopes to themselves. I told them I would hold them
for a month and then mail them all.
                                  page_105

Page 106
The reports I got back were remarkable. Some people said seeing those
thoughts written to themselves in their own handwriting brought the
whole seminar back to them. They felt a rush of excitement and a new
commitment to take action.
Are you willing to remind yourself to treat yourself to your own best
thoughts? Are you willing to set visual traps and ambushes, so you'll
always see words and thoughts you know you want to remember?
50. Get down and get small
The fewer goals you set each day, the more you feel "pushed around"
by people and events that are beyond your control.
You suffer from a sense of powerlessness. Rather than creating the
reality you want, you are only reacting to the world around you. You
have much more control over the activities of your day than you realize.
By increasing your conscious use of small objectives, you will see the
larger objectives coming into reality.
Most people participating in the free enterprise system have become
thoroughly convinced of the power of setting large and specific
long-range goals for themselves. Career goals, yearly goals, and monthly
performance goals are always on the mind of a person with ambition.
But often those people overlook altogether the power of small
goals—goals set during the day that give energy to the day and a sense
of achieving a lot of small "wins" along the way.
In his psychological masterpiece, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal
Experience, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi refers to large goals as "outcome"
goals and small goals
                                page_106

Page 107
as "process" goals. The beauty of "process" goals is that they are always
within your immediate power to achieve. For example, you might set a
process goal of making four important telephone calls before lunch. On
a sheet of paper you make four boxes, and as you make each call you
fill in a box, and when the four are made, you file the paper in your goal
folder and go enjoy lunch. Because you've earned it.
You can set process goals, for example, before a conversation with a
person. I want to find these three things out, I want to ask these four
questions, I want to make these two requests, and I want to pay my
client one compliment before I leave.
Process goals give you total focus. When you are constantly setting
process goals, you are in more control of your day, and you feel a sense
of skillful self-motivation.
At the end of the day, or the beginning of the next day, you can check
your progress toward your "outcome" goals. You can adjust your
process goals to take you closer to the outcomes you want, and always
keep the two in harmony.
Let's say it's now the end of a long, hard day. You have a half hour
before you have to go home. If you're not in the habit of setting process
goals, you might say, "I guess I ought to do some paperwork or make a
call or two before I go home." You look at the pile of paper on your
desk, or you mindlessly thumb through phone numbers, and all of a
sudden someone comes by your desk to chat. Because you have nothing
specific to do you engage in conversation and, before you know it, the
half hour is gone and you have to go home. Even though you didn't
leave anything specific unfinished, you still have that vague feeling of
having wasted time.
                                 page_107

Page 108
Now what happens if you use that half hour to set and achieve a process
goal? "Before I go home tonight I'm going to send out two good letters
of introduction with all my marketing material included." Now you have
a process goal and only a half hour in which to do it.
When the person comes by your desk to chat, you tell him you'll have to
talk to him later because you've got some things "that have to get out"
by five.
People who get into the swing of setting small goals all day long report a
much higher level of consciousness and energy. It's as if they are
athletes constantly coaching themselves through an ongoing game. They
are happier people because their day is being created by the power
inside their own minds, and not by the power of the world around them.
51. Advertise to yourself
I often start the day by drawing four circles on a blank piece of paper.
The circles represent my day (today), my month, my year, and my life.
Inside each circle I write down what I want. It can be a dollar figure, it
can be anything, and the goals can change from day to day—it doesn't
matter. There is no way to get this process "wrong."
But by writing the goals down, I am like an airline pilot who is
consulting his or her map prior to takeoff. I am orienting my mind to
what I am up to in life. I am reminding myself of what I really want.
We wouldn't think, before an airline flight, of poking our heads into the
cabin and saying to the pilot, "Just take me anywhere!" Yet that's how
we live our days when we don't check the map.
                                 page_108

Page 109
Sometimes in my seminars on motivation, people observe that they
"don't have time" for goal setting. But the four-circle system I described
takes only four minutes!
Once during a workshop on goal setting, I asked if anyone in the
audience had any interesting experiences with visualization. We had
been discussing sports psychologist Rob Gilbert's observation that
"losers visualize the penalties of failure, and winners visualize the
rewards of success."
A young couple shared a story about how they had wanted for years to
buy their own home but never got the money together to do it. Then one
day, after reading about the practice of "treasure-mapping" (posting
pictures of what you want in life somewhere in your office or home),
they decided to put a picture on their refrigerator of a new house, the
kind they dreamed of owning.
"In less than nine months, we'd made the down payment and moved in,"
said the amazed husband. His wife added, "Alongside the photo of the
house we eventually put a little thermometer that we filled in as our
savings toward a down payment grew."
I have heard many similar stories about how treasure mapping has
worked for people. I have also read books and attended seminars that
explain why. Most of them discuss what happens to the subconscious
mind when you send it a picture of something you want. Because the
subconscious mind only communicates with vividly imagined or real
pictures, it will not seek to bring into your life anything you can't
picture.
Without advertising our goals to ourselves, we can lose sight of them
altogether. It is possible to go an entire week, or two or three, without
thinking about our main goals in life. We get caught up in reacting
                                  page_109

Page 110
and responding to people and circumstances and we simply forget to
think about our own purpose.
I have an example of how this practice worked in my life: Three years
ago I was interested in giving more seminars on the subject of
fund-raising. I had co-authored a book called RelationSHIFT:
Revolutionary Fund-Raising with University of Arizona development
director Michael Bassoff. We had done some successful seminars on the
subject, and I wanted to do more. So, on the wall of my bedroom I put
up a white poster board, and on that board I put up a lot of pictures and
index cards with my goals on them. I wanted to have all those goals in
front of me when I woke up each morning, even though I only spent a
minute or two looking at the board each day.
One of the index cards I had pinned to my goal board simply contained
the bold-markered letters, "ASU." It was almost lost among the
hodgepodge of photos and goals I'd covered the board with, and I'm
certain I only barely noticed it each morning as I got up. I put it up there
because I thought it would be great if I could give seminars to Arizona
State University, especially now that I was living in the Phoenix area. I
really thought nothing more of it.
One day at the offices of the corporate training company where I
worked, I was asked to shake the hand of a new employee, Jerry. I
asked Jerry to come in and sit down. We talked in my office for a few
minutes about his joining the company. I asked him about his family and
he casually mentioned that his parents were living in town, and that his
mother worked at ASU.
Normally, that would have meant nothing. ASU is a very well-known
and oft-mentioned presence in the Phoenix area. But something went
off in my mind when
                                page_110

Page 111
he said that, and I know in hindsight that "something" was my daily
view of my goal board.
My ears perked up when he said "ASU" and I asked him, "What does
your mother do at ASU?" "She's the chief administrative assistant to the
development director at the ASU Foundation," he said. "They're in
charge of all the fund-raising at the University."
I really brightened at that point, and I told Jerry about my past work in
fund-raising at the University of Arizona in Tucson, and how I'd always
wanted to do similar work at ASU. He said he'd be delighted to
introduce me to his mother and to the development director himself.
Within a month, ASU fund-raisers were attending my seminar in
"RelationSHIFT" and I had realized one of the goals on my board.
I honestly believe that if I had not had a goal board up in my bedroom,
Jerry's mention of ASU would have gone right past me.
And this illustrates something important. We need to advertise our own
goals to ourselves. Otherwise, our psychic energy is spread too thin
across the spectrum of things that aren't that important to us.
52. Think outside the box
Once I attended a new business proposal presentation by Bob Koether,
in which he had his prospective customers all play a little nine-dot game
that illustrated to them that the solutions to puzzles are often simple to
see if we think in unconventional ways.
As people laughed and tore up their puzzles in frustration when Koether
showed them the solution, he stood up to make his final point.
                                  page_111

Page 112
"We restrict our thinking for no good reason," said Koether. "We do
things simply because that's the way we always did them. I want you to
know that our commitment in serving your company is to always look
outside the box for the most innovative solutions possible to our
problems. We'll never do something just because that's the way we have
always done it"
To many business leaders pitching a lucrative account, this kind of
puzzle-solving exercise would simply be considered a clever
presentation. But to Bob Koether, it was a symbolic expression of his
whole life in business.
Once, on a Xerox-sponsored trip in Cancun, Mexico, Bob and Mike
spent the day out in treacherous waters on a fishing boat. After coming
ashore, they retired to Carlos O'Brien's restaurant for tequila and beer
and a period of reflection on their lives in sales thus far.
"We knew that as well as we had done, we would never own boats like
the one we were just in if we remained at Xerox," said Bob. "We talked
about possibilities in the bar, and it wasn't long before we noticed some
black T-shirts on the wall with the word infinity on them. Then, for
more than two hours, Mike and I discussed just what the word infinity
meant. Out of that discussion, a dream was born, a dream that took
shape in the form of Infinity Communications."
Bob Koether and his brother believed that there was one vital area in
which Xerox was underperforming—and that was customer service.
What if, they asked, a company's commitment to the customer was
infinite? Not boxed-in, but unlimited in its possibilities for creative
service?
With that concept as motivation, the two brothers formed "Infincom"
(short for Infinity Communications)
                                  page_112

Page 113
in the state of Arizona, and within 10 years they grew from six
employees and no customers into a $50 million business with more than
500 employees. And for the past three years straight, the Arizona
Business Gazette has ranked Infincom the number-one office equipment
company in Arizona—ahead of Xerox.
All of us tend to look at our challenges from inside a box. We take what
we've done in the past and put it in front of our eyes and then try to
envision what we call "the future." But that restricts our future. With
that restricted view, the best the future can be is a "new and better
past."
Great motivational energy occurs when we get out of the box and
assume that the possibilities for creative ideas are infinite. To realize the
best possible future for yourself, don't look at it through a box
containing your own past.
53. Keep thinking, keep thinking
Motivation comes from thought.
Every act we take is preceded by a thought that inspires that act. And
when we quit thinking, we lose the motivation to act. We eventually slip
into pessimism, and the pessimism leads to even less thinking. And so it
goes. A downward spiral of negativity and passivity, feeding on itself
like cancer.
I like to use this example in my seminars to illustrate the power of
continuing to think: Let's say a pessimist has made up his mind to clean
his garage on a Saturday morning. He wakes up and walks out to the
garage and opens the door and is shocked to see just how much of a
mess it is. "Forget this!" the pessimist says with disgust. "No one could
clean this garage in one day!"
                                  page_113

Page 114
And at that point the pessimist slams the garage door shut and goes back
inside to do something else. Pessimists are "all-or-nothing" thinkers.
They think in catastrophic absolutes. They are either going to do
something perfectly or not at all.
Now let's look at how the optimist would face the same problem. He
wakes up on the same morning and goes to the same garage and sees the
same mess and even utters the same first words to himself, "Forget this!
No one could clean this garage in one day!"
But this is where the key difference between an optimist and a pessimist
shows itself. Instead of going back into the house, the optimist keeps
thinking.
"Okay, so I can't clean the whole garage," he says. "What could I do
that would make a difference?"
He looks for awhile, and thinks things over. Finally it occurs to him that
he could break the garage down into four sections and do just one
section today.
"For sure I'll do one today," he says, "and even if I only do one section
each Saturday, I'll have the whole garage in great shape before the
month is over."
A month later, you see a pessimist with a filthy garage and an optimist
with a clean garage.
There was a woman in one of my seminars in Las Vegas who told me
that this one concept—the optimist's habit of looking for partial
solutions—had made an interesting difference in her life.
"I used to come home from work and look at my kitchen and just throw
up my hands and curse at it and do nothing at all," she told me. "I'd
think the exact same thing as the pessimist in your garage story. Then I
decided to just pick a small part of the kitchen and do that, and that area
only. It might be a certain counter, or just the sink. By doing just one
small part each night
                                 page_114

Page 115
I never resent the work, it's never overwhelming, and my kitchen
always looks decent."
Pessimists like to set their problems aside. They think so negatively
about "doing the whole thing perfectly" that they end up doing nothing
at all!
The optimist always does a little something. She or he always takes an
action and always feels like progress is being made.
Because pessimists have a habit of thinking "it's hopeless" or "nothing
can be done," they quit thinking too soon. An optimist may have the
same initial negative feelings about a project, but he or she keeps
thinking until smaller possibilities open up. This is why Alan Loy
McGinnis, in his inspiring book The Power of Optimism, refers to
optimists as "tough-minded."
The pessimist, as far as the use of the human mind goes, is a quitter.
Recent studies show, says McGinnis, that optimists "excel in school,
have better health, make more money, establish long and happy
marriages, stay connected to their children and perhaps even live
longer."
To witness one of the most profound illustrations of the practical
effectiveness of optimism in American history, you'll want to rent the
movie, Apollo 13. Although the job of bringing those astronauts back
from the far side of the moon looked daunting and overwhelming, the
job was accomplished one small task at a time. The people at Mission
Control in Houston who saved the astronauts' lives did so because even
in the face of "impossible" technological breakdowns, they kept on
thinking. They never gave up. They looked for partial solutions, and
they declared that they would string these partial
                                  page_115

Page 116
solutions together one at a time until they brought the men home safely.
While the astronauts' lives were still in doubt, there was one glaring
pessimist in Houston ground control who made the comment that he
feared that Apollo 13 might become the "worst space disaster" in
American history. The ground commander in Houston turned to him and
said with optimism and anger, "On the contrary, sir, I see Apollo 13 as
being our finest hour." And he turned out to be right, which illustrates
the life-or-death effectiveness of optimistic thinking.
Whenever you feel pessimistic or overwhelmed, remember to keep
thinking. The more you think about a situation, the more you will see
small opportunities for action—and the more small actions you take, the
more optimistic energy you will receive. An optimist keeps thinking and
self-motivates. A pessimist quits thinking—and then just quits.
In the Broadway musical South Pacific, the heroine sings apologetically
about being a "cock-eyed optimist." She admits she's "immature and
incurably green." This was an early version of a blonde joke. She
confesses, as the giddy song soars melodically, that she's "stuck like a
dope on a thing called hope and I can't get it out of my heart...not this
heart."
That's how our society has viewed optimists—they are dopes. Society
thinks optimistic thinking is something that comes from the heart, not
the head.
Pessimists, on the other hand, are "realistic." In fact, pessimists will
never tell you they are pessimists. In their own minds, they are realists.
And when they run into habitual optimists they sneer at them for always
"blue-skying" everything, and not facing grim reality.
Pessimists continually use their imaginations to visualize worst-case
scenarios, and then concluding that
                                 page_116

Page 117
those scenarios are lost causes, they take no action. That's why
pessimism always leads to passivity.
But even lying on his couch, bloated with junk food and foggy from too
much television, the pessimist knows somewhere in his heart that his
"what's the use?" attitude is not effective. He is living a life that is
reflected in what Nietzsche once said: "Everything in the world
displeased me; but what displeased me most was my displeasure with
everything."
Optimists have chosen to make a different use of the human
imagination. They agree with Colin Wilson's point of view that
"imagination should be used, not to escape from reality, but to create
it."
54. Put on a good debate
Negative thinking is something we all do. The difference between the
person who is primarily optimistic and the person who is primarily
pessimistic is that the optimist learns to become a good debater. Once
you become thoroughly aware of the effectiveness of optimism in your
life, you can learn to debate your pessimistic thoughts.
The most thorough and useful study I've ever seen on how to do this is
contained in Dr. Martin Seligman's classical work, Learned Optimism.
The studies done by Seligman demonstrate two very profound
revelations: 1) optimism is more effective than pessimism; and 2)
optimism can be learned.
Seligman based his findings on years of statistical research. He studied
professional and amateur athletes, insurance salespeople, and even
politicians running for office. His scientific studies proved that optimists
dramatically outperform pessimists. So what Norman Vincent Peale had
been saying for years in his books on
                                 page_117

Page 118
the power of positive thinking was finally proven to be scientifically
true.
Peale had based his books on testimonials and supportive biblical
passages. The problem with that was that the people he needed to reach
the most—skeptics and pessimists—were precisely the kinds of people
who would not be anxious to take anything on faith. But once you've
digested the remarkable writings of Seligman, you can go back and read
Peale with a new sense of excitement. If you don't accept his religious
references, it doesn't matter—the personal testimonials are stimulating
enough to give his writing great power. Although his most famous book
is The Power of Positive Thinking, I have derived much more
motivation from Stay Alive All Your Life and The Amazing Results of
Positive Thinking.
If you are now skeptical about your power to debate your own
pessimistic thoughts, keep in mind that most of us are already great
debaters. If somebody comes in and takes one side of an argument, we
can usually take the other side and make a case, no matter which side
the first person took. Debate teams have to learn to do this. Team
members never know until the last second which side of the argument
they will be debating, so they learn to be prepared to passionately argue
either side.
If you catch yourself brooding, worrying, and thinking pessimistically
about an issue, the first step is to recognize your thoughts as being
pessimistic. Not wrong or untrue—just pessimistic. And if you are going
to get the most out of your bio-computer (the brain), you must
acknowledge that pessimistic thoughts are less effective.
Once you've accepted the pessimistic nature of your thinking, you are
ready to take the next step. (This first step is crucial though. As
Nathaniel Branden teaches,
                                   page_118
Page 119
"You can't leave a place you've never been.") The second step is to
build a case for the optimistic view.
Start to argue against your first line of reasoning. Pretend you're an
attorney whose job is to prove the pessimist in you wrong. Start off on
building your case for what's possible. You'll surprise yourself.
Optimism is by nature expansive—it opens door after door to what's
possible. Pessimism is just the opposite—it is constrictive. It shuts the
door on possibility. If you really want to open up your life and motivate
yourself to succeed, become an optimistic thinker.
55. Make trouble work for you
One evening, many years ago, my then-14-year-old daughter Stephanie
went for a walk with a friend, promising me she would be back home
before 10 p.m. I didn't pay much attention to the clock until the 10
o'clock news ended and I realized that she hadn't come home yet. I
started to get nervous and irritated. I began pacing the house, wondering
what to do. At 11:30 I got in my car and started cruising the
neighborhood looking for her. My thoughts were understandably
anxious, part fear and part anger. Finally, at 11:45, I drove back past my
own house and saw her silhouette in the window. She was home and
safe.
But I kept driving. I realized that I was thinking completely
pessimistically about the entire incident and I needed to keep thinking
before I talked to her. As I drove along I observed all the pessimism I
was wallowing in: "She doesn't respect me. She can't keep a promise.
My rules and requests mean nothing. This is the tip of the iceberg. I'm
going to have problems with her for the next four years at least. Who
knows where she went and what she was doing? Were drugs involved?
Sex?
                                  page_119

Page 120
Crime? I'm losing sleep over this. This is ruining my peace of mind and
my life. Et cetera."
By recognizing how pessimistic my thoughts were, I was able to let the
thoughts play completely out before taking a deep breath and telling
myself, "Okay. That's one side of the argument. Now it's time to explore
the other side." One of my favorite tricks for flipping my mind over to
the optimistic side is to ask myself the question: "How can I use this?"
How could I use this incident to improve my relationship with my
daughter? How could I make my rules and requests more meaningful to
us both? I began to build my case for optimism. I realized that great
relationships are built by incidents like these. They are not built by
theoretical conversations—but by difficult experiences and what we
learn and gain from them.
So I decided to drive a little while longer and let her wait inside. I was
sure that by now her sister had told her that I was out looking for her, so
she was now the one pacing and anxious. Let her sweat a little, I
thought, while I continue to think things through.
I continued to reflect upon my past relationship with Stephanie. One of
the great aspects of it was Stephanie's honesty. She had always radiated
a quiet and confident kind of serenity about life, and found it easy to be
honest with her own feelings and honest with other people. Whenever
there had been incidents with other children, teachers, or other parents
involved in some misunderstanding, I could always count on Stephanie
to tell me the truth. Asking her about what happened always saved me a
lot of time.
As I drove the dark neighborhood I also ran through my happiest
memories of Stephanie as a little girl, how much I loved her and how
proud I was of her when I
                                 page_120

Page 121
went to her concerts or talked to her teachers. I recalled the time in
grade school when I embarrassed her by asking her principal if he would
consider re-naming the school after her. (She had just won an academic
award of some kind and I was intoxicated with pride.)
Finally my mind was completely won over to the optimistic side. "How
can I use this?" gave me the idea that this incident could be made into
something bigger than it seemed—a new commitment to each other to
keep agreements and trust each other.
When I finally got home I could see that she was scared. She tried to
blame the incident on her not having a watch. She wanted me to
appreciate that, somehow, she was a victim of the whole incident. I
listened patiently and then I told her I thought it was a much bigger deal
than that. I talked about my relationship with her and how I had
cherished her truthfulness throughout her childhood. I told her that I
thought we might have lost all of that tonight. That we might have to
figure a way to start over.
"It's not that big a deal," she protested. But I told her that I thought it
was a very big deal, because it was all about our relationship and
whether we were going to keep agreements with each other.
I told Stephanie I wanted her to be as happy as she could possibly be,
and the only way I could really help that happen would be if we kept
agreements with each other. I told her how scared I was, how angry I
was, how her staying out had ruled out a good night's sleep for me. I
asked her to try to understand. I talked about our life together when she
was a little girl, and I reminded her how extraordinarily truthful she was.
I mentioned a few incidents when she got in trouble but how I had gone
right to her for the truth and always got it.
                                  page_121

Page 122
We talked for a long time that night, and she finally saw that coming
home when she says she's coming home—indeed, doing what she says
she's going to do—is a really "big deal." It's everything.
Since that incident and conversation, Stephanie has been extremely
sensitive to keeping her word. If she goes out and promises to be back
at a certain time, she takes along a watch or makes certain someone
she's with has one. The "incident" that night is something neither of us
will forget, because it got us clear on the idea of trust and agreements.
You could even say that it was a good thing.
We have heard of so many incidents where bad events in retrospect
were strokes of great fortune. A person who broke her leg skiing met a
doctor in the hospital, fell in love, married him, and had a happy
relationship for life. Because most of us have experienced a number of
these incidents, we're aware of the dynamic. What seems bad (like a
broken leg) turns out unexpectedly great. We begin to see the truth that
every problem carries a gift inside it.
By choosing to make use of seemingly bad events, you can access that
gift much sooner. By asking yourself "How can I use this?" or "What
might be good about this?" you can turn your life around on a dime.
56. Storm your own brain
The term "brainstorming" is now very well known in American business
life.
I first learned it many years ago when I worked as a copywriter in an ad
agency. Whenever we would get a new account our agency's president
would get us all together to "brainstorm" for creative ideas for the
client.
                                   page_122

Page 123
The main rules of the brainstorming session are 1) there are no stupid
ideas—the more unreasonable the better—and 2) everyone must play.
I have sometimes facilitated brainstorming sessions with business
managers. We go around the table and each person puts out an idea and
the facilitator writes it on the flip pad. We go around and around until
all the reasonable ideas are exhausted and the unreasonable ideas start
to flow. It is usually among the unreasonable ideas that something great
is discovered. Brain-storming works so well because the usual restraints
against stupidity are lifted. It's okay to be unreasonable and far out.
What most people in business don't realize is that this powerful
technique can be used by an individual, alone with himself or herself. I
first discovered this while driving in my car a number of years ago
listening to a motivational tape by Earl Nightingale. He talked about a
system he had learned that worked wonders.
On the top of a piece of paper you put a problem you want solved or a
goal you want reached. You then put numbers 1 through 20 on the
paper and begin your brain-storming session. The rules are the same as
with a group session. You have to list 20 ideas, and they don't have to
be well thought out or even reasonable. Give yourself permission to
flow. Your only objective is to have 20 ideas scrawled down within a
certain short amount of time.
If you do this for a week, you will end up with 100 ideas! Are all of
them usable? Of course not, but who cares? When you began the
process you probably didn't have any usable ideas.
I have used this system myself over and over with really great results. It
works so well because it relaxes
                                    page_123

Page 124
the normal tensions against creative, outrageous thinking. It invites the
right side of your brain to play along.
Recently a friend called for some advice about his career. He was in
show business and had developed his act to the point where he was one
of the top performers in the nation. His problem was marketing and
self-promotion. That part of his career was lagging behind his talent.
"What if I told you that there is someone who can give you 100 specific
marketing ideas tailored to your precise career and audience?" I asked
him. He was very interested.
"You, yourself are that person," I said.
I then told him about the list-of-20 self-storming technique I had
personally been using for a number of years. He eagerly jotted down the
rules of the game and got busy playing.
Two weeks later he called me very excited about the results. "I've got
some really great marketing ideas right now, more than I've ever had in
the past," he said. "Thanks."
Self-mentoring is the best mentoring you can get because your mentor
knows you so well. And although it's often beneficial to get specific
outside personal coaching, the best coaching teaches us to look within.
A great mentor once said, "The kingdom of heaven is within you."
57. Keep changing your voice
There have been times when I have been told that I am lucky to have a
good speaking voice. And some people are impressed that I rarely use a
microphone in my seminars, even with hundreds of people in the
audience.
People will conclude that I have been "blessed" with a powerful set of
vocal cords. But it is not true. As I
                                  page_124

Page 125
related in an earlier chapter, my voice used to be no better than a feeble
monotone. That is, until I got motivated to change it. There were two
instances that inspired my system for developing my voice. The first
was a magazine interview I read many years ago about the actor
Richard Burton (who had perhaps the most mesmerizing speaking voice
of all time—listen to the Broadway recording of "Camelot" and hear
him as King Arthur speak and "sing" his songs.) In the interview, Burton
said that his voice was how he made his living, so he made certain that
each morning while showering he sang a number of songs to keep his
vocal cords strong and supple. Later, on a television talk show, actor
Tony Randall told the host how he developed his trademark sing-song
acting voice: "I took up opera," he said. "I found that singing opera did
more for my stage voice than anything else I ever tried."
Those two interviews have stayed in my mind ever since, and I always
carry a number of tapes and CDs in my car to sing along with. I crank
them up good and loud (this is best done while driving alone) and sing at
the top of my lungs. I make certain that I do this every day, even when I
don't feel like singing. In the words of William James, there's another
benefit: "We don't sing because we're happy, we're happy because we
sing."
Prior to a major public speech, I'll often get to my location more than an
hour ahead of time and then just drive around the neighborhood singing
like a madman. (Sometimes I worry that my host client might drive by
and spot me in my car singing along with Elvis and looking dangerously
psychotic. But the benefits are worth that risk.) I find that when I drive
and sing like that my breathing is better, my timing is better, and when I
speak, my voice effortlessly fills the hall.
                                  page_125

Page 126
You might think, "I don't speak for a living." So such a weird practice
might not be necessary for you. But we all speak. A pleasant, relaxed,
and strong speaking voice is a priceless asset to anyone whose job
involves communicating with other humans.
When referring to people whose speaking voices are pleasing to listen
to, many people use words like "melodious" and "well-modulated." This
is a good hint to tell if someone is complimenting a great speaking voice.
You are not stuck with the voice you have now. Start singing, and soon
you'll be creating the voice you'd like to have. The stronger your voice,
the stronger your confidence and the stronger your confidence, the
easier it is to motivate yourself.
58. Embrace the new frontier
Fortunately, for all of us, a new frontier is upon us. Because our nation,
and world, has entered the information age, the old patterns for living
are gone.
An article by business writer John Huey appeared in the June 27, 1994
edition of Fortune. In it, Huey observed, "Let's say you're going to a
party, so you pull out some pocket change and buy a little greeting card
that plays 'Happy Birthday' when it's opened. After the party, someone
casually tosses the card into the trash, throwing away more computer
power than existed in the entire world before 1950."
In the old paradigm, forged in the Industrial Age, we human beings
became less and less useful and adventurous. We found lifelong
employment in guaranteed jobs and did our jobs the same way until
retirement. Then, once we reached retirement age, we became
thoroughly useless to society and lived lives dependent
                                  page_126

Page 127
on the government, our relatives, or our own savings that we
accumulated in our "useful" years.
Now, with the technological explosion and entry into the Information
Age, employers are no longer as interested in our job histories as they
used to be. They are now more interested in our current capabilities.
One of the romantic appeals of the early Daniel Boone and Davy
Crockett frontier days in our nation was the usefulness of individuals. If
you were living out on the frontier, farming, cooking, and hunting, and
you turned 65, it would never occur to anyone to ask you to "retire."
We have finally come back to those days of honoring usefulness over
age and status. For example, if my company is trying to enter the
Chinese market to sell its software and you, at age 70, can speak fluent
Chinese, know all about software, and have energy and a zest for
success, how can I afford to ignore you?
Bill Gates of Microsoft has said, "Our company has only one
asset—human imagination." If you took all of Microsoft's buildings, real
estate, office hardware, physical assets—anything you can
touch—away from the company, where would it be? Almost exactly
where it is now. Because in today's world a company's value is in it's
thinking, not in its possessions.
This is great news for the individual—because usefulness is back in
style. If you can cultivate your skills, keep learning new things, study
computers, learn a foreign language, or become expert in a foreign
culture and market—you can make yourself useful.
The great basketball coach John Wooden recommended that we live by
this credo—especially apt for the new technological frontier: "Learn as
if you were to live forever. Live as if you were to die tomorrow."
                                  page_127

Page 128
Gone are the days when your employability depended primarily on your
job history, your school ties, your connections, your family, or your
seniority. Today your employability depends on one thing—your
current skills. And those skills are completely under your control.
This is the new frontier. And where we once entered retirement age
nervous about the "wolves at our door," today, with a commitment to
lifelong growth through learning, we can be as useful to the world
community as we are motivated to be.
The more we learn about the future, the more motivated we become to
be a valuable part of it.
59. Upgrade your old habits
Super motivation is much more difficult to achieve when we are held
back mentally by bad habits. Trying to move toward the life we want
while dragging along our bad habits was described in the Scottish rock
group Del Amitri's song lyrics, "It's like driving with the brakes on, it's
like swimming with your boots on..."
But here's the catch: Bad habits simply cannot be broken. Nor can they
be gotten rid of. Ask the millions who continue to try. They always end
up, in the words of Richard Brautigan, "trying to shovel mercury with a
pitchfork," because our bad habits exist for good reasons. They're there
to do something for us, even if that something ends up being
self-destructive. Down deep, even a bad habit is trying to make us
operate better.
People who smoke are trying, even through their addiction, to do
something beneficial—perhaps to breathe deeply and relax. Such
breathing is needed to balance stress, so their smoking is a way in which
they are trying to make themselves better. Bad habits are
                                  page_128

Page 129
like that—they are based on a perceived benefit. That's why they're so
hard to just "get rid of."
That's why habits must be respected and understood before they can be
transformed. What created the habit must be built upon, not killed. We
must go to the beneficial impulse that drives the habit, and then expand
on that to make the habit grow from something bad into something
good.
Let's take drinking as an example. I've known people who used to be
drunk all the time who are now sober all the time. How did they do it?
Couldn't we just say that they just got rid of their drinking habit? Not
really. Because, without exception, the recovered people I know
replaced their drinking with something else.
Taking all of one's courage, relaxation, and spirituality from a bottle of
alcohol is a very damaging habit. But to simply eliminate it leads to
even worse problems: shakes, DTs, fear, dread, paranoia. A total void.
People who join Alcoholics Anonymous, however, replace their "false
courage"—once found in a bottle of alcohol—with real courage found
in the meeting rooms of AA. The completely artificial sense of
spirituality formerly found in a tumbler of spirits is replaced by the true
and deeply personal spirituality found in working the 12-step program
of enlightenment. The superficial but highly emotional relationships the
alcoholic had made in his favorite bars are replaced by real friendships.
Replacement is powerful because it works, and where bad habits are
concerned it's the only thing that works. I've known people who quit
smoking without intending to. They took up running, or some form of
regular aerobic exercise, and soon the breathing and relaxation they
were getting from the exercise made the
                                 page_129

Page 130
smoking feel bad to their bodies. They quit smoking because they had
introduced a replacement.
People who diet have the same experience. It isn't staying away from
fattening food that works—it's introducing a regular diet of delicious,
healthy food that works. It's replacement.
Subconsciously you don't think your bad habits are bad! And that's
because they're filling a perceived need. So the way to strengthen
yourself is to identify the need and honor it. Honor the need by
replacing the current habit with one that is healthier and more
effective. Replace one habit, and soon you'll be motivated to replace
another.
60. Paint your masterpiece today
Think of your day as a blank artist's canvas.
If you go through your day passively accepting whatever other people
and circumstances splatter on your canvas, you will more than likely see
a mess where art could be.
If the mess troubles your sleep, your next new day will begin in a state
of fatigue and mild confusion. From such a state, your canvas will be
splattered all the more with shapes you don't like and colors you never
chose.
Thinking of your day as a painter's canvas will allow you to be more
conscious of what is happening to you when you flood your mind with
nothing but Internet gossip, commercials on the radio, the latest murder
trial, your spouse's criticisms, office politics, and pessimistic musical
lyrics.
If you'll allow yourself to step back far enough to realize and truly see
that your daily canvas is filling up with all these negative things, a
certain freedom occurs. It's the freedom to choose something better.
                                  page_130

Page 131
The more conscious we are of our freedom to paint whatever we want
on our canvas, the less we go through life as a victim of circumstances.
Many of us aren't even aware of our own victim status. We read
whatever's on the coffee table, listen to whatever's on the car radio, eat
whatever's handy, scan whatever's on the Internet, talk to whomever
calls us on the phone, and watch whatever's on the television—often
too passive to even click the remote control.
We must be aware that we have it in us to change all that. We can paint
our day our way. The best time management—or "day-painting"
—course I ever took was taught by Dennis Deaton. His seminar's main
point is that we can't manage time—we can only manage ourselves.
"Clear the clutter from your mind," Deaton says, "and remove the
obstacles to greater success."
While most time management courses feel like courses in engineering,
Deaton has captured the spirit of the artist in his teaching. His
prescriptions for managing your day all stem from goal-creation and
living the visions you create.
Wake up and visualize your day as a blank canvas. Ask yourself,
"Who's the artist today? Blind circumstance, or me? If I choose to be
the artist, how do I want to paint my day?"
61. Swim laps underwater
When Bobby Fisher prepared for his world championship chess match
with Boris Spassky, he prepared by swimming laps underwater every
day.
He knew that as the chess matches wore on into the late hours, the
player with the most oxygen going to his brain would have the mental
advantage. So he built his chess game by building his lungs.
                                page_131

Page 132
When he defeated Spassky, many were surprised by his astonishing wit
and mental staying power, especially late in the matches when both
players should've been weary and burned out. What kept Bobby Fisher
alert wasn't caffeine or amphetamines—it was his breathing.
General George Patton once gave a lecture to his troops on brainpower.
He, too, knew the connection between breathing and thinking.
"In war, as in peace, a man needs all the brains he can get," said Patton.
"Nobody ever had too many brains. Brains come from oxygen. Oxygen
comes from the lungs where the air goes when we breathe. The oxygen
in the air gets into the blood and travels to the brain. Any fool can
double the size of his lungs."
I learned about Patton's passion for teaching his troops deep breathing
from Porter Williamson. I had once written a few political radio and
television commercials that caught Mr. Williamson's attention, so he
called me and asked me to lunch one day. Because he had identified
himself as the author of Patton's Principles, I eagerly accepted his
invitation, having coincidentally read the marvelous book a few weeks
earlier. Williamson had served in the army for many years as Patton's
most trusted legal adviser.
Williamson told me many stories about serving with Patton, and how
truly extraordinary a motivator the general was. Most of the Patton
quotes in this book come from Williamson's own memories of his
service with the great general. Williamson told me about how he himself
had lost his leg to bone cancer, and how the doctors had erroneously
forecasted his death twice. His inner strength, he said, often came from
the inspiration he received in his days of serving with Patton.
"Frequently, General Patton would stop at my desk," recalled
Williamson, "and ask, 'How long you
                                 page_132

Page 133
been sitting at that desk? Get up and get out of here! Your brain stops
working after you sit in a swivel chair for 20 minutes. Keep the body
moving around so the juices will run to the right places. It'll be good for
the brain! If you sit in that chair too long all of your brainpower will be
in your shoes. You cannot keep your mind active when your body is
inactive.' "
That one principle—an active mind cannot exist in an inactive
body—became Bobby Fisher's secret weapon in winning the world
championship of chess. Who would have guessed that swimming
underwater would make you a better chess player? Certainly not the
overweight, worn-out chess "genius" Boris Spassky.
Sometimes, all you need is the air that you breathe to motivate yourself.
Going for a run or a walk or simply deep breathing gives the brain the
fuel it feeds on to be newly refreshed and creative.
62. Bring on a good coach
After a rare disappointing round on the golf course, Tiger Woods will
often take a golf lesson.
When I first heard about this, I asked myself, who could give Tiger
Woods a lesson in golf?
But that was before I ever really understood the value of coaching. The
person who taught me that value was a young business consultant
named Steve Hardison. Hardison taught me this: Tiger takes a lesson not
because his coach is a better player who can give advice and tips, but
because his coach can stand back from Tiger Woods and see him
objectively.
Steve Hardison had created an art form of coming into corporations and
seeing things objectively. In fact, his perception ran deeper than that.
He had near-psychic power to "see what was missing." It was a gift he
                                 page_133

Page 134
could also apply to individuals, but only if they were ready for the rigors
of his coaching.
I used to teasingly call one of his illustrative personal stories "The
Parable of the Mission." As a young missionary for his church in
England, Hardison broke all records for enrolling congregants. He
contrasted his own method with that of the other missionaries.
While the others would rush out and knock on doors all day, Hardison
would spend the first part of each day planning and plotting his
activities. By creating his day before it happened, he was able to
combine visits, economize on travel time, and increase the number of
enrollment conversations in a given day. He also used his creative
planning time to set up intra-neighborhood referrals for himself so that
many of his visits came with a reference.
The other missionaries were very active, but they were focused on the
activity, not the result. They were in the business of knocking on doors
and scurrying about—Steve was in the business of enrolling people into
the church. The records he set for enrollment were no accident. He
planned things that way.
Steve helped me understand something that lives inside of all of us,
something he called "the voice." When you wake up in the morning, the
voice is there right away, telling you that you are too tired to get up or
too sick to go to work. During a sales meeting when you are just about
to say something bold to a client, the voice might tell you to cool it.
"Hold back." "Be careful."
"The trick is," said Steve, "to not ignore or deny the existence of the
voice. Because it's there, in all of us. No one is free of the voice.
However, you don't have to obey the voice. You can talk back to the
voice. And when you really get good, you can even talk trash to the
voice.
                                  page_134

Page 135
Make fun of it. Ridicule it. Point out how stupid it is. And once you get
into that way of debating your own doubts, you start to take back
control of your life."
Many times I'd be in the middle of a large business project and ask to
meet with Steve for an hour. After he listened for a few minutes, he
would almost invariably see right away what was "missing" in my
behavior. Like a great golf teacher watching Tiger Woods' backswing,
he would say, "Are you willing to accept some coaching on this?" And I
would eagerly say yes. Then he would tell me truthfully, sometimes
ruthlessly, what he saw. I didn't always like what he saw, but I always
grew stronger from talking about it.
Hardison's coaching was so jolting that sometimes it reminded me of an
incident that happened to me when I was a boy playing Little League
baseball.
I had injured my knee in a play at third base and when the game was
over the knee was swollen and my entire leg was stiff. As I sat on the
bench with my leg straight out in front of me, a doctor whose son was
on our team was kneeling down by my leg as my father looked on.
"I'd like you to bend your leg now," he said to me as his hands gently
held my swollen knee.
"I can't," I told him.
"You can't?" he asked, looking up at me. "Why can't you?"
"Because I tried, and it really hurts."
The doctor looked at me for a second, and then said simply but gently,
"Then hurt yourself."
I was startled by his request. Hurt myself? On purpose? But then,
without saying anything, I slowly bent my leg. Yes, there was
tremendous pain, but that didn't matter. I was still mesmerized by his
request.
                                 page_135
Page 136
The doctor massaged my knee with his fingers and nodded to my father
that everything would be okay. I'd have to have x-rays and the usual
precautionary exam, but he saw nothing seriously wrong for now.
But I was still aware that something very big had just happened to me.
After a boyhood that was characterized by avoiding pain and discomfort
of any kind, all of a sudden I saw that I could hurt myself if I needed to,
and that I could do it calmly without batting an eye. Perhaps I wasn't
the coward I'd always thought I was. Perhaps there was as much
courage in me as in anyone else, and it was all a matter of being willing
to call on it.
It was a defining incident in my life, and it was not dissimilar to the way
Steve Hardison, as a coach, has required that I call on things inside me
that I didn't know I had.
One time I was having a hard time enrolling people into seminars and
doing my prospecting calls on the phone. Steve grabbed the phone and
started calling people and signing them up. Then he accidentally dialed
a wrong number and reached some mechanic at a car repair garage.
Most people would have apologized at that point and hung up and
dialed again. But rather than waste the call, Steve introduced himself
and then stayed on the phone—until the mechanic had signed up for a
seminar.
Hardison is a gifted and courageous public speaker, a resourceful and
relentless salesperson, a talented athlete and a committed family man
and church member. The kind of guy who used to make me sick!
I could write an entire book about Steve Hardison's remarkable work in
coaching and consulting, and someday I just might. Examples of ways
that he coached me to higher levels of performance are plentiful. But I
think
                                 page_136

Page 137
the greatest thing he has taught me is the value of coaching itself.
Once you open yourself up to being coached, you begin to receive the
same advantages enjoyed by great actors and athletes everywhere.
When you open yourself up to coaching, you don't become
weaker—you grow stronger. You become more responsible for
changing yourself.
In The Road Less Traveled, M. Scott Peck writes, "The problem of
distinguishing what we are and what we are not responsible for in this
life is one of the greatest problems of human existence...we must
possess the willingness and the capacity to suffer continual
self-examination."
The best coaches show us how to examine ourselves. It takes courage to
ask for coaching, but the rewards can be great. The best moments come
when your coach helps you do something you have previously been
afraid to do. When Hardison would recommend that I do something I
was afraid to do I'd say, "I don't know if I could do that."
"So don't be you," he would say. "If you can't do that, then be someone
else. Be someone who could do it. Be DeNiro, be Bruce Lee, be
anybody, I don't care, as long as you do it."
Coaching's contribution to my life is illustrated in these words by French
philosopher Guillaume Apollinaire:
" 'Come to the edge,' he said.
They said, 'We are afraid.'
'Come to the edge,' he said.
They came.
He pushed them.
And they flew."
                                 page_137

Page 138
You can get coaching anytime. If coaching is appropriate for your golf
or tennis game, it is even more appropriate for the game of life. Ask
someone to be honest with you and coach you for a while. Let them
check your "swing." Let them tell you what they see. It's a courageous
thing to do, and it will always lead to more self-motivation and growth.
63. Try to sell your home
Once when Steve Hardison and I were discussing a few of my old habits
that were holding me back from realizing my business goals, I blurted
out to him, "But why do I do those things? If I know they hold me back,
why do I continue to do them?"
"Because they are home to you," he said. "They feel like home. When
you do those things, you do them because that's what you're
comfortable doing, and so you make yourself right at home doing them.
And as they say, there's no place like home."
"Home" can be an ugly place if it's not kept up and consciously made
beautiful. "Home" can be a dark, damp prison, smelling of bad habits
and laziness. But we still don't want to leave it, no matter how bad it
gets, because we think we are safe there.
However, when we inspect the worn-out house more closely, we can
see that the safety we think we're experiencing is pure self-limitation.
It's very hard to leave home—many of us try and fail many times. Noel
Paul Stookey wrote a hauntingly beautiful song called "The House
Song," which captures this feeling. The opening words are, "This house
goes on sale every Wednesday morning...and is taken off the market in
the afternoon."
                             page_138

Page 139
After grasping Hardison's metaphor of home, I immediately saw that I
needed to move out of my house. I needed to move up in the
neighborhood. I needed a better home. A home that contained habits
that would keep me focused on goal-oriented activity. Hardison helped
coach me in that direction until the new activities began to feel like
where I should have been living all along.
Hardison's metaphor of "home" as the equivalent of old disempowering
habits has stayed with me for a long time. Recently while I was putting
together a tape of motivational music to play in my car, I included the
energetic "I'm Going Home" by Alvin Lee and Ten Years After. As I
drove around listening to it turned up all the way, I thought about what
Hardison taught. I let the song be about the new home I would always
be in the process of moving to.
Don't be afraid to leave the psychic home you're in. Get excited about
building a larger, newer, happier home in your mind, and then go live
there.
In Colin Wilson's brilliant but little-known, out-of-print novel Necessary
Doubt, he created Gustav Neumann, a fascinating character who made
many discoveries about human beings. At one point Neumann says, "I
came to realize that people build themselves personalities as they build
houses—to protect themselves from the world. They become its
prisoners. And most people are in such a hurry to hide inside their four
walls that they build the house too quickly."
Identify the habits that keep you trapped. Identify what you have
decided is your final personality and accept that it might be a hasty
construction built only to keep you safe from risk and growth. Once
you've done that, you can leave. You can get the blueprints out and
create the home you really want.
                                  page_139

Page 140
64. Get your soul to talk
We've always been a little nervous, culturally, about talking to
ourselves. We usually associate it with insanity. But it was Plato who
said that his definition of thinking was "the soul talking to itself."
If you really want to get your life worked out, there is no one better to
talk to than yourself. No other person has as much information about
your problems and no other person knows your skills and capabilities
better. And there's no one else who can do more for you than yourself.
A lot of people in the motivational and psychological professions
recommend affirmations. You choose a sentence to say, such as, "Every
day in every way I'm getting better and better," and repeat it whether or
not you think it's true. While affirmations are a good first step to
re-programming, I prefer conversations. Conversations work faster.
The two most inspirational guidelines to productive self-conversational
exercises are in Martin Seligman's Learned Optimism and Nathaniel
Branden's The Six Pillars of Self-Esteem. Seligman offers ways to
dispute your own pessimism and create the habit of optimistic thinking.
Branden offers provocative sentence stems for you to complete.
Rather than brainlessly parroting "I'm getting better and better" to
myself, it makes a longer-lasting impression when I logically argue the
case and win. With enough back-and-forth conversation, I can prove to
myself that I am getting better. Proof beats the parrot every time. It's
one thing to try to hypnotize myself through repetition of words to
accept something as true, and it's quite another to convince myself that
it is true.
                                 page_140

Page 141
Branden suggests that we get our creative thinking going each morning
by asking ourselves two questions: 1) What's good in my life? and 2)
What is there still to be done?
Most people don't talk to themselves at all. They listen to the radio,
watch TV, gossip, and fill up on the words and thoughts of other people
all day long. But it's impossible to indulge in that kind of activity and
also get motivated. Motivation is something you talk yourself into.
65. Promise the moon
One frightening and effective way to motivate yourself is to make an
unreasonable promise—to go to someone you care about, either
personally or professionally, and promise them something really big,
something that will take all the effort and creativity you've got to make
happen.
When President John Kennedy promised that America would put a man
on the moon, the power of that thrilling promise alone energized all of
NASA for the entire time it took to accomplish the amazing feat. In his
book about the Apollo 13 mission, Lost Moon, astronaut Jim Lovell
called Kennedy's original promise "outrageous." But it showed how
effective being outrageous could be.
In his book Passion, Profit, and Power, Marshall Sylver recalls seeing a
billboard in Las Vegas put up by one of the casino owners who wanted
to become a non-smoker. The billboard read: "If You See Me Smoking
in the Next 90 Days, I'll Pay You $100,000!" Can you see the power in
that promise?
A couple of years ago I promised my children that I would send them to
camp in Michigan. They had been
                                page_141

Page 142
to the camp near Traverse City before, and loved it. When you live
during the year in Arizona, there's something magical about the water
and emerald forests of northern Michigan. It was an expensive camp,
but when I made the promise I was doing well financially, and I was
confident that they could all go.
Then as the summer neared I'd run short of money and had to rearrange
my priorities. My speaking schedule had replaced much of the
commissioned selling I was doing and it looked like camp might not be
in the picture.
I remember specifically talking to my boy Bobby, who was 8 years old
at the time, about how times were temporarily hard and how camp
didn't look like a good possibility any more this year. He was in the
front seat of the car and I'll never forget for as long as I live the look on
his face. He said very softly, so softly that I could barely hear him, "but
you promised."
He was right. I didn't say I'd try, I didn't say it was a goal, I promised.
And the feelings I had at that moment were so overwhelming that I
finally said to him, "Yes, I did promise. And because you reminded me
that it was a promise, I will say to you right now that you're going to
camp. I'll do what it takes. I'm sorry that I forgot it was a promise."
The first thing I did was change jobs, and my first condition on
accepting my new job was that my bonus for signing was the exact
amount of money it took to send my children to camp. It was done.
66. Make somebody's day
To basketball coach John Wooden, making each day your masterpiece
was not just about selfish personal
                                  page_142

Page 143
achievement. In his autobiography, They Call Me Coach, he mentions
an element vital to creating each day.
"You cannot live a perfect day," he said, "without doing something for
someone who will never be able to repay you."
I agree with that. But there's a way to make sure you can't be
repaid—and that's doing something for someone who won't even know
who did it.
This gets into a theory I've had all my life, that you can create luck in
your life. Not from the idea that luck is needed for success, because it
isn't. But from the idea that luck can be a welcome addition to your life.
You can create luck for yourself by creating it for someone else. If you
know about someone who is hurting financially, and you arrange for a
few hundred dollars to arrive at their home, and they don't even know
who you are, then you've made them lucky. By making someone lucky,
something will then happen in your own life that also feels like pure
luck. (I can't explain why this happens, and I have no scientific basis for
it, so all I can say is try it a few times and see if you aren't as startled as
I have been at the results...it doesn't have to be money, either. We have
a lot of other things to give, always.)
When you get lucky, you'll get more motivated, because you feel like
the universe is more on your side. Experiment with this a little. Don't be
imprisoned by cynicism posing as rationality on this subject. See what
happens to you when you make other people get lucky.
67. Play the circle game
If you use my four-minute, four-circle, goal-setting system described
earlier you can be the creator of your universe.
                                    page_143

Page 144
"You know, that's blasphemous," a seminar student once told me during
a break. "Only God can create the universe."
"But if you believe that," I said, "you must also believe as it is written,
that we were all created in God's image. And if you believe in God as
the Creator, and that He created us in His image, then what are we
doing when we don't create? Whose image are we living in when we
deliberately do not create?"
Try this: After you wake up in the morning, wipe the sleep from your
eyes, sit down with a pad of paper, and draw four circles. These are
your own "planets." Label the first circle, "Lifelong Dream." (And in
order to keep this example simple, I'll make it strictly financial, although
you can do it with any kinds of goals you want.) Your lifelong dream
might be to save a half a million dollars for your retirement years. So,
put that number in your "Life" circle. Then look at circle two, the next
planet in your solar system. That circle you will label, "My Year." What
do you need to save in the next year in order to be on course to hit your
life savings goal? (When you factor in the interest, it's less than you
think.) And when you arrive at the figure, make certain that it matches
up mathematically with your first circle. In other words, if you save this
amount, and save, say 10 percent more each year that follows, will you
achieve your "Life" number? If not, do some more math until you get a
direct connection between your yearly savings projection and your
lifelong goal.
Now that you've got your first two circles filled with a number, move to
the third circle, "My Month." What would you have to save each month
to hit your year's goal? Then put that number down. Three circles are
now filled.
                                page_144

Page 145
Now go to the final circle, "My Day." What do you need to do
today—that if you repeated it every day—would ensure a successful
month?
(By the way, as I said, this doesn't have to just be about money, it can
be about physical fitness, learning a language, relationship networking,
spirituality, nutrition, or anything important to you.)
The power of this system lies in thinking of it as a universe, which, as
Wayne Dyer keeps reminding us, means "one song." When you work
the math, you cannot help but see that each circle, if done successfully,
guarantees the success of the next circle. If you hit your daily goal
every day, your monthly goal is automatically hit—in fact you don't
even have to worry about it. And if your monthly goal is reached, the
yearly goal has to happen. And if your yearly goals are hit, the lifelong
goal cannot not be reached.
When you study the irrefutable mathematical truth contained in this
system, a strange feeling comes over you. You realize that all four
circles are ultimately dependent on the success of just one circle: the
circle labeled, "My Day."
Then you get the strangely empowering sensation that you have just
proved on paper that your day and your life are the same thing. There is
no future other than the future you are working on today. Your future is
not stranded out there somewhere in space.
This is what the great poet Rainer Maria Rilke meant when he said,
"The future enters into us, in order to transform itself in us, long before
it happens."
Remember that once you have worked out the math for this, the circle
game is only a four-minute daily exercise. Many times in seminars I
give, participants will say that they are too busy for all this goal-setting
activity. They have lives to live! But I like to remind them of
                                   page_145

Page 146
the words of Henry Ford who said, "If you do not think about the
future, you won't have one."
And I also like to stress that I am only talking about four minutes a day.
The purpose of making the circles mathematically sound is that you can
remove the elements of "faith" and "hoping" from your action plan. You
know your goals will be hit. Who would you want to bet on, the tennis
player who has faith that she's going to win or the one who knows she's
going to win?
By drawing these simple four circles you can create your universe
anywhere, anytime. Waiting in line at the bank, sitting in the doctor's
office, waiting for a meeting to begin, or just doodling. Each time you
do it, your universe gets closer to you. Each time you draw the circles
you are hit with this revelation: There is absolutely no difference
between succeeding today and having a successful life.
In The Magic of Believing, Claude Bristol recounts a particularly
absent-minded habit of his that, looking back, may have had a bigger
impact on shaping his universe than he ever realized. He said that
whether he was on the phone, or just sitting in moments of abstraction,
he would always have a pen or pencil out doodling.
"My doodling was in the form of dollar signs like these—$$$$$—on
every paper that came across my desk. The cardboard covers of all the
files that were placed before me daily were covered with these
markings; so were the covers of telephone directories, scratch pads, and
even the face of important correspondence."
Bristol's later studies on "mind stuff experiments," "the power of
suggestion," and "the art of mental pictures" caused him to conclude
that his lifelong habit of doodling dollar signs had had an enormous
impact on programming his mind to always be opportunistic and
                                  page_146

Page 147
enterprising when it came to money. The fortune he acquired demands
that we take his observations seriously.
68. Get up a game
It is said that John F. Kennedy's father's credo was, "Don't get mad, get
even."
And that credo has a certain vengeful, clever wisdom in it as far as it
goes, but you might go even further with this credo: "Don't just get
even—get better."
When Michael Jordan was a sophomore in high school he was cut from
his high school basketball team. Michael Jordan was told by his coach
that he wasn't good enough to play high school basketball. It was a
crushing disappointment for a young boy whose heart was set on
making the team, but he used the incident—not to get mad, not to get
even, but to get better.
We all have those moments when people tell us, or insinuate to us, that
they don't think we measure up—that they don't believe in us. Some of
us have entire childhoods filled with that experience. The most common
reaction is anger and resentment. Sometimes it motivates us to "get
even" or to prove somebody wrong. But there's a better way to respond,
a way that is creative rather than reactive.
"How can I use this?" is the question that puts us on the road to
creativity. It transforms the anger into optimistic energy, so we can
grow beyond someone else's negative expectations.
Johnny Bench, a Hall of Fame baseball player, knew what it was like to
not be believed in.
"In the second grade," he said, "they asked us what we wanted to be. I
said I wanted to be a ballplayer and they laughed. In the eighth grade
they asked the same
                                 page_147

Page 148
question, and I said a ballplayer, and they laughed a little more. By the
11th grade, no one was laughing."
Our country has gone through a difficult period of time since World
War II. We no longer value heroes and individual achievement as we
once did. "Competition" has become a bad word. But competition, if
confronted enthusiastically, can be the greatest self-motivating
experience in the world.
What some people fear in the idea of competition, I suppose, is that we
will become obsessed with succeeding at somebody else's expense. That
we'll take too much pleasure in defeating and therefore "being better"
than somebody else. Many times during conversations with my
children's teachers, I am told how the school has progressively removed
grades and awards from some activities "so that the kids don't feel they
have to compare themselves to each other." They are proud of how
they've softened their educational programs so that there's less stress
and competition. But what they are doing is not softening the
program—they are softening the children.
If you are interested in self-motivation, self-creation, and being the best
you can be, there is nothing better than competition. It teaches you the
valuable lesson that no matter how good you are, there is always
somebody better than you are. That's the lesson in humility you need,
the lesson those teachers are misguidedly trying to teach by removing
grades.
It teaches you that by trying to beat somebody else, you reach for more
inside of yourself. Trying to beat somebody else simply puts the "game"
back into life. If it's done optimistically, it gives energy to both
competitors. It teaches sportsmanship. And it gives you a benchmark for
measuring your own growth.
                               page_148

Page 149
The poet William Butler Yeats used to be amused at how many
definitions people came up with for happiness. But happiness wasn't any
of the things people said it was, insisted Yeats.
"Happiness is just one thing," he said. "Growth. We are happy when we
are growing."
A good competitor will cause you to grow. He will stretch you beyond
your former skill level. If you want to get good at chess, play against
somebody better at chess than you are. In the movie Searching for
Bobby Fisher, we see the negative effects of resisting competition on a
young chess genius until he starts to use the competition to grow. Once
he stops taking it personally and seriously, the game itself becomes
energizing. Once he embraces the intriguing fun of competition, he gets
better and better as a player, and grows as a person.
I mentioned earlier that I'd heard a report on the radio that there was a
Little League organization somewhere in Pennsylvania that had decided
not to keep score in its games anymore because losing might damage the
players' self-esteem. They had it all wrong: Losing teaches kids to grow
in the face of defeat. It also teaches them that losing isn't the same as
dying, or being worthless. It's just the other side of winning. If we teach
children to fear competition because of the possibility of losing, then we
actually lower their self-esteem.
Compete wherever you can. But always compete in the spirit of fun,
knowing that finally surpassing someone else is far less important than
surpassing yourself.
If you're better at a game than I am, when I play against you and try to
beat you it's really not you I'm after. Who I'm really beating is the old
me. Because the old me couldn't beat you.
                                  page_149

Page 150
69. Turn your mother down
Psychologist and author M. Scott Peck observes, "To a child, his or her
parents represent the world. He assumes that the way his parents do
things is the way things are done."
In Dr. Martin Seligman's studies of optimism and pessimism, he found
out the same thing: We learn how to explain the world to ourselves from
our parents—and more specifically, our mothers.
"This tells us that young children listen to what their primary caretaker
(usually the mother) says about causes," writes Seligman, "and they
tend to make this style their own. If the child has an optimistic mother,
this is great, but it can be a disaster for the child if the child has a
pessimistic mother." Fortunately, Seligman's studies show that the
disaster need only be temporary—that optimism can be learned...at any
age.
But it is not self-motivating to blame Mom if you find yourself to be a
pessimist. What works better is self-creation: to produce a voice in your
head that's so confident and strong that your mother's voice gets edited
out, and your own voice becomes the only one you hear.
And as much as you want to eliminate the continuing influence of a
pessimistic adult from your childhood, remember that blaming someone
else never motivates you because it strengthens the belief that your life
is being shaped by people outside yourself. Love your mom (she learned
her pessimism from her mother)—and change yourself.
70. Face the sun
"When you face the sun," wrote Helen Keller, "the shadows always fall
behind you."
                                   page_150

Page 151
This was Helen Keller's poetic way of recommending optimistic
thinking. What you look at and what you face grows in your life. What
you ignore falls behind you. But if you turn and look only at the
shadows, they become your life.
When I was younger I remember hearing other kids tell a joke about
Helen Keller. "Have you heard about the Helen Keller doll?" they
would ask. "You wind it up and it bumps into things."
I've often thought about that joke, and why such a joke about someone
who was deaf and blind was funny. I think the answer lies in our
nervousness about other people overcoming huge misfortunes. (Perhaps
we laugh nervously because we haven't overcome our own small ones.)
In our own day and age, we are quick to consider ourselves victims. We
are all victims of some sort of emotional, social, gender, or racial abuse.
We enjoy taking what difficulties we have had in life and blowing them
up into huge injustices.
Helen Keller didn't complain about being from a dys-functional family,
or of being a woman, or of not being given enough money from the
government to compensate her for her handicaps. She had challenges
most of us can't even imagine, but she refused to become fascinated by
them and make her handicaps her life. She didn't want to focus on the
shadows when there was so much sun.
There is a bumper sticker that I see every so often as I'm driving around:
"Life is a bitch and then you die." I always wonder about that bumper
sticker because it seems illogical. If life is that bad, death should be
welcome. The sticker should say, "Life is a bitch, but the good news is
you die."
                                 page_151

Page 152
British author G.K. Chesterton used to say that pessimists (like the
person with that sticker on his car) don't stay anti-life very long when
you put a revolver to their heads. All of a sudden, they can think of a
million reasons to live. Those million reasons are always there, down
inside of us, waiting to be called up. Our pessimism is usually a false
front put on to get sympathy.
Another popular bumper sticker has been "Shit Happens." I happen to
consider that bumper sticker to be ironically optimistic. It's one of the
qualities of optimists that they are not surprised, overwhelmed, or
offended by trouble. They know that trouble comes, and they know
they can handle it.
Some people have been upset by the popularity of this slogan, and I've
seen them try to counter with the sticker, "Love Happens." Actually,
they have it wrong. Shit does happen. But love does not. Love doesn't
happen all by itself. Love is created.
In his stirring book Son Rise, Barry Neil Kaufman tells an astonishing
true story of how he and his wife healed their once-autistic son and
helped nurture him to a happy, extroverted life. Kaufman and his wife
made a conscious choice to see their son's disability as a great blessing
to them. It was just a choice, like choosing to face the sun instead of
facing your shadows. But as Kaufman says, "The way we choose to see
the world creates the world we see."
71. Travel deep inside
Most of us wait to find out who we are from impressions and opinions
we get from other people. We base our own so-called self-image on
other people's views of us.
                                  page_152

Page 153
"Oh, do you really think I'm good at that?" we ask, when someone
compliments us. If we're persuaded that they are being honest and have
made a good case, we might try to alter our self-image upward.
It's great getting feedback from others, especially positive feedback. We
all need it to live and feel good. But when it's all we've got, we're in
danger of being far less than we could be, because our self-image
always depends on others. And all they see is what we're risking right
now. What they never see is what's inside of us, waiting to emerge.
Because they can't see that, they will always underrate us.
Your journey can be internal. You can travel deeper and deeper inside
to find out your own potential. Your potential is your true identity—it
only waits for self-motivation to come alive.
"For this is the journey that men and women make," said James A.
Michener, "to find themselves. If they fail in this, it doesn't matter much
else what they find."
Let positive reinforcement and compliments be a mere seasoning to
your life. But prepare your life's meal yourself. Don't look outside
yourself to find out who you are, look inside and create who you are.
72. Go to war
Anthony Burgess was 40 when he learned that he had a brain tumor that
would kill him within a year. He knew he had a battle on his hands. He
was completely broke at the time, and he didn't have anything to leave
behind for his wife, Lynne, soon to be a widow.
Burgess had never been a professional novelist in the past, but he
always knew the potential was inside him to be a writer. So, for the sole
purpose of leaving
                                 page_153

Page 154
royalties behind for his wife, he put a piece of paper into a typewriter
and began writing. He had no certainty that he would even be
published, but he couldn't think of anything else to do.
"It was January of 1960," he said, "and according to the prognosis, I had
a winter and spring and summer to live through, and would die with the
fall of the leaf."
In that time Burgess wrote energetically, finishing five and a half novels
before the year was through—(very nearly the entire lifetime output of
E.M. Forster, and almost twice that of J.D. Salinger.)
But Burgess did not die. His cancer had gone into remission and then
disappeared altogether. In his long and full life as a novelist (he is best
known for A Clockwork Orange), he wrote more than 70 books, but
without the death sentence from cancer, he may not have written at all.
Many of us are like Anthony Burgess, hiding greatness inside, waiting
for some external emergency to bring it out. I believe that's why my
father and many people of his generation speak so fondly about World
War II. During the war, they lived in a state of emergency that brought
out the best in them.
If we don't pay attention to this phenomenon—how crisis inspires our
best efforts—we tend to brainlessly create a life based on comfort. We
try to design easier and easier ways to live, so that we won't be
surprised or challenged by anything.
People who get the knack of self-motivation can reverse this process
and get that wonderful "World War II" sense of vitality into their lives.
Athletes do it constantly.
"How do you feel about tonight's game with the Trail Blazers?" a
reporter once asked basketball star Kobe
                               page_154

Page 155
Bryant. "It'll be a war out there," he said with a twinkle in his eye.
We don't have to wait for something tragic or dangerous to attack us
from the outside. We can get the same vitality going by challenging
ourselves from within.
A useful exercise for self-motivation is to ask yourself what you'd do if
you had Anthony Burgess's original predicament. "If I had just a year to
live, how would I live differently? What exactly would I do?"
73. Use the 5% solution
Many years ago, when I first began considering the idea of changing my
life, I went through some emotional mood swings. I would get very high
on an idea of who I could be, and I'd set out to change myself overnight.
Then my old habits would pull me back to who I used to be, and I would
become demoralized and depressed for weeks, thinking I didn't have
what it took to change. As the weeks went by, I finally caught on to the
idea that great things are often created very slowly, so why couldn't
great people be created the same way? I began to see the value in small
changes, here and there, that led me in the direction of who I wanted to
be.
If I wanted to be someone who was healthy and had good eating habits,
I would introduce a salad here, a piece of fruit there, and take the
creative process very slowly. Now I almost never eat red meat, but it
didn't happen by simply ruling it out one night. (All the times I tried
that, my stomach, which used to far outrank my mind in my internal
chain of command, would rule it back in the first time I smelled a
barbecue in the neighborhood.)
Pyschotherapist Dr. Nathaniel Branden is known for the effectiveness
in his therapy of using sentence
                                 page_155

Page 156
completion exercises. By asking his clients to write out or speak six to
10 endings, quickly, without thinking, to a "sentence stem," he allows
people to explore their own minds for their hidden power and creativity.
A typical sentence he might ask you to complete six to 10 times would
be, "If I bring five percent more purposefulness into my life today...."
Then you, the client, give your rapid endings to the sentence. That's
how you find out what you think and secretly know about your own
power to add purpose to your life. One of the fascinating aspects of
Branden's sentences is the "five percent" part. It seems like an awfully
small amount of change when you look at it, but think of how it would
play out. If you brought five percent more purposefulness to your life
each day, it would only be 20 days before you had doubled your sense
of purpose.
Huge things can be accomplished by focusing on one small action at a
time. Novelist Anne Lamott recalls an incident in her childhood, the
memory of which always helps her "get a grip."
"Thirty years ago," she remembers, "my older brother, who was 10
years old at the time, was trying to get a report on birds written that he'd
had three months to write, which was due the next day. We were out at
our family cabin in Bolinas, and he was at the kitchen table close to
tears, surrounded by binder paper and pencils and unopened books on
birds, immobilized by the hugeness of the task ahead. Then my father
sat down beside him, put his arm around my brother's shoulder, and
said, 'Bird by bird, buddy. Just take it bird by bird.' "
When we stay the same, it's not because we didn't make a big enough
change, but rather because we didn't do anything today that sent us
moving toward change.
                                  page_156

Page 157
If you continue to think of yourself as a great painting you are going to
paint, then wanting to instantly change is like wanting to finish your
portrait in 10 minutes and then put it up in the art gallery.
If you see yourself as a masterpiece-in-progress, then you will relish
small change. A tiny thing you did differently today will excite you. If
you want a stronger body, and you took the stairs instead of the
elevator, celebrate. You are moving in the direction of change.
If you want to change yourself, try making the changes as small as they
can be. If you want to create yourself, like a great painting, don't be
afraid to use tiny brush strokes.
74. Do something badly
Sometimes we don't do things because we're not sure we can do them
well. We feel that we're not in the mood or at the right energy level to
do the task we have to do, so we put it off, or wait for inspiration to
arrive.
The most commonly known example of this phenomenon is what
writers call "writer's block." A mental barrier seems to set in that
prevents a writer from writing. Sometimes it gets so severe that writers
go to psychotherapists to get help for it. Many writers' means of earning
a living depends on its cure.
The "block" (or lack of self-motivation) occurs not because the writer
can't write, but because the writer thinks he can't write well. In other
words, the writer thinks he doesn't have the proper energy or inspiration
to write something, right now, that's good enough to submit. So the
pessimistic voice inside the writer says, "You can't think of anything to
write, can you?" This happens to many of us, even with something as
small as a postcard to send, or an overdue e-mail to answer.
                                 page_157

Page 158
But the writer doesn't really need psychotherapy for this. All he or she
needs is an understanding of how the human mind is working at the
moment of the "block."
The cure for writer's block—and also the road to self-motivation—is
simple. The cure is to go ahead and write badly.
Novelist Anne Lamott has a chapter in her marvelous book Bird by
Bird called "Shitty First Drafts." The key to writing, she says, is to just
start typing anything—it can be the worst thing you've ever written, it
doesn't matter.
"Almost all good writing begins with terrible first efforts," says Lamott.
"You need to start somewhere. Start by getting something
—anything—down on paper."
By the mere act of typing you have disempowered the pessimistic
"voice" that tried to convince you not to write. Now you are writing.
And once you're in action, it's easy to pick up the energy and pick up
the quality.
Singer-songwriter John Stewart says, "When you're in the first stages of
creating, never, ever censor yourself."
We're often afraid to do things until we're sure we'll do them well.
Therefore we don't do anything. This tendency led G.K. Chesterton to
say, "If a thing is worth doing, it's worth doing badly."
Going out for a run gives me an example of the same phenomenon.
Because I don't feel that I have a good, strong run in me, the voice says
"not today." But the cure for that is to decide to do it anyway—even if
it will be a bad run. "I don't feel like running now, so I'm going to go out
and run slowly, in such lazy, bad form that it does me no good, but at
least I will have run."
                                  page_158

Page 159
But once I start, something always happens to alter my feelings about
the run. By the end of the run, I notice that it had somehow become
thoroughly enjoyable.
In my self-motivation seminars, I often give a homework assignment for
people to write down what their main goals are for the next year. I ask
them to fill no more than a half-page. This is not a difficult assignment
for people who are willing to just come off the top of their heads and
have fun filling the page. But you would be surprised at how many
people absolutely anguish over it, trying to get it "right," as if they were
going to be held forever to what they write down. Many people simply
can't do it.
To get them to complete the exercise, I say, "put anything down. Make
something up. It doesn't even have to be true. They don't even have to
be your goals, just do it so you can understand the exercise we're about
to do." The point is to just do it.
In many ways we are all novelists like Anne Lamott. Our novels are our
lives. And many of us get a tragic form of writer's block that causes us
to not write anything at all. It's a tragedy, because deep down we are
very creative. We could write a great life. It's just that we're so afraid of
writing badly, that we never write.
Don't let this happen to you. If you're not motivated to do something
you know you need to do, just decide to do it badly. Add a little
self-deprecating humor. Be comically bad at what you're doing. And
then enjoy what happens to you once you're into the process.
75. Learn visioneering
A few years ago I spent some enjoyable time working with motivational
speaker Dennis Deaton and teaching his principles of "visioneering"
—which he defines
                                   page_159

Page 160
as "engineering dreams into reality" by the use of active mental imaging.
When I gave my weekly Thursday night public seminars, I'd sometimes
teach Deaton's "visioneering" concepts, and my (then) little daughter
Margery would always accompany me. She helped hand out workbooks
and pencils and when the seminar got started she would take a seat in
the audience, open her own workbook and participate. She was 10 at
the time, and I was never certain exactly how much she was absorbing.
Then one weekend afternoon by the pool at our apartment complex, I
relaxed in a deck chair while Margie and her girlfriend Michelle played
by the pool. There were a lot of people in and around the water that
day, but above them all I could hear Margery and Michelle having a
heated conversation down by the deep end of the water.
"I just can't do it!" said Michelle.
"Yes, you can," said Margie. "You just have to believe you can."
"I'm afraid to dive," said Michelle. "I've never dived in my life."
"Michelle," said Margie, "listen to me. Will you just try it my way?"
"I don't know," said Michelle. "Okay, what's your way?"
"Just close your eyes," said Margie, "and picture yourself on a diving
board. Can you see yourself standing up there?"
"Yes," said Michelle.
"Okay good!" said Margie. "Now, I want you to get an even better
picture. What kind of bathing suit are you wearing? Can you see it?"
"It's red, white, and blue," said Michelle, her eyes still closed. "It's like
an American flag."
                                  page_160

Page 161
"Great," said Margie. "Now picture yourself diving off the board in slow
motion, just like in a dream. Can you see that?"
"Yes I can," said Michelle.
"That's great!" shouted Margie. "Now you can do it. Because if you can
dream it, you can do it! Let's go over here and do it."
Michelle followed her slowly to the end of the pool. I was looking over
the top of my book but not letting them know I was listening. I was
amazed. I had no idea what would happen next, but I noticed a number
of people around the pool area watching and listening with fascination,
while pretending not to.
Michelle walked up to the edge of the water and looked very scared.
She looked at Margie, and Margie said, "Michelle, I want you to keep
saying, very softly, 'If I can dream it, I can do it' and then I want to see
you dive in."
Michelle kept repeating "If I can dream it, I can do it," and all of a
sudden, surprising even herself, she dove—a near-perfect dive into the
deep end with almost no splash!
Margie was jumping up and down and clapping when Michelle came up
from the water. "You did it!" she shouted, and Michelle was grinning as
she climbed up to do it again.
Could it be, I thought to myself, that this system is this simple?
The principle is this: You won't do anything you can't picture yourself
doing. Visioneering is just another word for picturing yourself. Once you
make the picturing process conscious and deliberate, you begin to
create the self you want to be. We dive into the pictures we create.
                                  page_161

Page 162
76. Lighten things up
Sunlight and laughter. That's what cures most fears and worries.
Terrifying problems are better solved in the light than in the dark. And
there are many ways to bring them into the light.
Pick a frightening problem. Then do the following: Talk about it with
someone, draw an illustrated map of it on a huge piece of paper, make
"Top 10" lists about the problem, tell yourself some jokes about the
problem, sing about the problem and, finally, dance a dance that
expresses the problem.
If you do all these things, I promise you that your problem will seem a
lot funnier, and less frightening, than it once did. It is impossible to
laugh deeply and be frightened at the same time.
G.K Chesterton used to say that "taking things lightly" was the most
spiritually advanced thing you could do to improve your effectiveness in
life.
"After all," said Chesterton; "it's because God's angels take themselves
so lightly that they are able to fly. And if His angels take themselves
that lightly, imagine how much more lightly He takes Himself."
My friend Fred Knipe is a three-time Emmy award-winning television
writer who also performs as a comedian in the character of "Dr. M.F.
Ludiker"—world expert on everything. Fred is one of the funniest
human beings I have ever known. He never fails to lighten me up, no
matter how big the problem I have.
Dr. Ludiker mounts the stage and puts his ludicrous "Ludiker Institute"
logo in front of the podium—a logo that features a cartoon human brain
hanging between two electrical towers. He then proceeds to give, in a
mild Teutonic accent, his "advice from hell."
                                  page_162

Page 163
"With the increase in domestic violence," the doctor says, "I am
advocating that home appliance manufacturers begin installing airbags."
On the subject of our growing intolerance of crime, he
says—"Criminals, among the most deeply tense in our communities, will
soon have trouble recruiting top people because they can no longer
escape the sense that there is resentment building about what they do
for a living."
"It was inevitable," he observes, "that genetic engineering would come
from a generation that played Mr. Potato Head."
Knipe's editing of my writing also causes me to lighten up. (While
making helpful handwritten notes on the manuscript for this book, he
recommended that I refer to the Lakota shaman Lame Deer as "Super
Shaman Lame Deer.")
While going through my recovery from a frightening disease that
featured, at one point, uncontrolled bleeding, he left me a comforting
phone message that said, "Don't worry about the bleeding. It's normal
for someone your age."
Fred shares my long-held belief that humor is the highest form of
creativity. It's the hardest to produce and the most enjoyable to receive.
Humor, like all other creativity, is a matter of making unusual
combinations. The more surprising the combination, the funnier the
humor.
Your own motivational level will always be lifted by humor. Any time
you are stuck, ask yourself to take things lightly. Ask yourself to come
up with some funny solutions. Laughter will destroy all limits to your
thinking. When you are laughing, you are open to anything.
                                   page_163

Page 164
77. Serve and grow rich
One good way to motivate yourself is by increasing the flow of money
into your life.
Most people are embarrassed to even think this way. They don't want to
"think and grow rich" because they think they will be thought of as
selfish or greedy. Or maybe they still believe in the thoroughly
discredited Marxist economic superstition that to make money, you
have to take it away from somebody else. Or else they don't want to
come across as being obsessed with money.
But do you know who is really obsessed with money? People who don't
have any. They obsess about money all day long. It's in their family
discussions, it's in their minds at night, and it becomes a destructive part
of their relationships during the day.
The best way not to be obsessed with money is to trust your game plan
for earning your way to financial freedom. "Our first duty," said George
Bernard Shaw, "is not to be poor."
The road to not being poor always travels through your professional
relationships in life. The more you serve those relationships, the more
productive those relationships will become, and the more money you
will make.
"Money is life energy that we exchange and use as a result of the
service we provide to the universe," wrote Deepak Chopra in Creating
Affluence. When you understand that money flows from service, you
have a chance to understand something even more valuable:
Unexpectedly large amounts of money come from unexpectedly large
degrees of service.
The way to generate unexpected service to the people in your life is to
ask yourself, "What do they expect?" Once you're clear on what that is,
then ask, "What
                              page_164

Page 165
can I do that they would not expect?" It's always the unexpected service
that gets talked about. And it's always getting talked about that
increases your professional value.
As Napoleon Hill repeatedly pointed out, great wealth comes from the
habit of going the extra mile. And it is always a smart business move to
do a little more than you are paid for.
It is almost impossible to enjoy a life of self-motivation when you're
worried about money. Don't be embarrassed about giving this subject a
great deal of thought. Thinking about money a little bit in advance frees
you from having to always think about it later. Allow yourself to link
financial well-being with an increased capacity for compassion for
others. If I am living in poverty, how much love and attention can I give
to my children or my fellow humans? How much help can I be if I, for
sheer lack of creative planning, am always worried about being in debt?
"Poverty is no disgrace," said Napoleon Hill. "But it is certainly not a
recommendation."
78. Make a list of your life
Never hesitate to sit down with yourself and make lists. The more you
write things down, the more you can dictate your own future. There is
an unfortunate myth that lists make things trivial. But lists do the
opposite—they make things come alive.
I have a friend who made a list of all the positive things about himself
that he could think of. He listed every characteristic and
accomplishment that he could remember in his life that he was proud of.
He keeps the list in his briefcase, and says he often reads through it
when he's feeling down.
                                 page_165

Page 166
"By seeing all those things written down, and letting myself read them
one at a time, I can change my entire attitude from being discouraged to
feeling positive about myself," he says.
Writing lists of goals and objectives is also a powerful self-motivator.
It's one thing to go into a meeting mentally briefed on what you want to
accomplish, but you'll feel even stronger having written it out. There is
something about writing something down that makes it more real to the
right side of your brain.
My friend Fred Knipe sometimes travels to Phoenix to spend a day
talking with me. We've been close friends since college and share an
unorthodox sense of humor. Our meetings together are anything but
structured. We free-associate and talk about everything under the sun.
Yet, I notice that he'll often arrive with a list.
In the days prior to our meeting, he'll jot down subjects he wants to be
sure he remembers to talk to me about while we are together. And it's
because our conversations are so free-form that the list is valuable for
him. He doesn't ever have to call me back the next day and try to
discuss something over the phone that would have been much better
discussed in person.
If you've ever tried grocery shopping for a large event without a
shopping list, you are aware of the nightmare it can be. Most people
have learned not to shop that way. I've learned by hard experience that
it can mean additional trips to the store to pick up forgotten items.
Yet why is it that people don't apply that same principle to their lives?
Most people take more time planning a picnic than they do planning a
life. Because they know that if they don't make a list and forget the hot
dog buns as a result, they are going to be called an idiot by someone.
                                   page_166

Page 167
But isn't a life as important as a picnic?
Start by listing all the things you would like to do before you die. Keep
the list somewhere handy, where you can look at it and add to it.
Then list the people in your life you want to remain close to and stay in
touch with. Friendship is so precious, why let it be forgotten? It sounds
silly to make a list of your friends, but you'll be surprised at how it
reminds you who's important and motivates you to stay in touch.
My friend Terry Hill, the writer, is one of the greatest list-makers of all
time. He has a list of every book he has ever read, every poem he's
read, and many more things I don't even know about. It gives his life a
sense of history, depth, and direction.
We don't have to wait to become famous so that someone else might
write our history. We can be writing our history while it happens.
And when we list our goals, we're writing our history before it happens.
When legendary advertising executive David Ogilvy started his
advertising agency, by making a list of the clients that he most wanted
—General Foods, Lever Brothers, Bristol Myers, Campbell Soup
Company, and Shell Oil. At the time, they were the biggest advertising
accounts in the world, and he had none of them. But in a sense he did
have them, because they were in his list.
"It took time," said Ogilvy, "but in due course I got them all."
A goal gains power when you write it down, and more power every time
you write it down.
What motivates you most in life ought to be in your own handwriting.
People all too often look for motivation in what others have written. If
you become a good
                                page_167

Page 168
list-maker, you will learn how to motivate yourself by what you've
written.
79. Set a specific power goal
Most people are surprised to learn that the reason they're not getting
what they want in life is because their goals are too small. And too
vague. And therefore have no power.
Your goals will never be reached if they fail to excite your imagination.
What really excites the imagination is the setting of a large and specific
power goal.
Usually, a goal is just a goal. But a power goal is a goal that takes on a
huge reality. It lives and breathes. It provides motivational energy. It
gets you up in the morning. You can taste it, smell it, and feel it. You've
got it clearly pictured in your mind. You've got it written down. And
you love writing it down because every time you do it fills you with
clarity of purpose.
In his audiotape series, "Visioneering," my old partner Dennis Deaton
teaches the transforming power of lofty goals. Deaton talks about
creating a "mental movie" that you watch as often as possible. He urges
you to make it a movie that stars you—living the results of achieving
your specific goal.
Walt Disney left us many great things: Disneyland, Walt Disney World,
great animated films, and Annette Funicello. But what I believe was his
greatest gift was the summing up he did of his life's work: "If you can
dream it," he said, "you can do it."
A power goal is a dream with a deadline. The deadline itself motivates
you. People who have created power goals start living on purpose. They
know what they're up to in life.
                                  page_168

Page 169
How can you tell if you've got a big enough and real enough power
goal? Simply observe the effect your goal has on you. It's not what a
goal is that matters; it's what a goal does.
80. Change yourself first
Don't change other people. It doesn't work. You'll waste your life trying.
Many of us spend all our time trying to change the people in our lives.
We think we can change them in ways that will make them better
equipped to make us happy. This is especially true of our children. We
talk to our children for hours about how we think they should change.
But children don't learn from what we say. They learn from what we do.
Today's children, upon hearing us talk to them about how they should
change will often say, "Yeah, right." I think they got this phrase from
Bart Simpson. It's shorthand for "I'm not listening to what you say, I'm
listening to what you do."
Gandhi was especially tuned in to the futility of changing other people.
Yet Gandhi was probably responsible for more change in people than
any other person in our era was. How did he do it? He had a profoundly
simple formula. People would often come to Gandhi to ask how they
could change others. Someone would say, "I agree with you about
nonviolence, but there are others who don't. How do I change them?"
And Gandhi told them they couldn't. He said you couldn't change other
people.
"You must be the change you wish to see in others," said Gandhi. In my
own seminars, I probably use that one quotation more than any other. I
am always asked,
                                 page_169

Page 170
"How can I change my husband?" Or, "How can I change my wife?" Or,
"How can I change my teenager?"
People who take the seminars on self-motivation, at some point during
the workshop, agree completely with the principles and ideas. Then,
they start to think about the people who don't buy in. In the question-
and-answer period, their questions are about those poor people. How do
we change them? I always quote Gandhi. Be the change you wish to see
in others.
By being what you want them to be, you lead by inspiration. Nobody
really wants to be taught by lectures and advice. They want to be led
through inspiration.
Sales managers often ask me how they can get a certain salesperson to
do more self-motivated activities. I tell them that they have to be the
salesperson they want to see. Take them on a call, I say, and let them
watch you. Don't tell them how to do it, inspire them to do it.
I once attended a concert given by my daughter's fourth-grade chorus,
which sang a song called "Let There Be Peace on Earth." The song's
words went, "Let there be peace on earth, and let it begin with me...." I
beamed when I heard it. It was such a beautiful expression of being the
change—a celebration of self-responsibility that rarely is portrayed in
young people's lives today.
What you tell people to do often goes right by them. Who you are does
not.
81. Pin your life down
Car dealer extraordinaire Henry Brown once told me a story about his
son, a high school wrestler. His boy had been getting only fair results as
a wrestler that year and when Henry talked to him about it he learned
the reason.
                                page_170

Page 171
Henry's son entered each wrestling match more than thoroughly
prepared to counter anything his opponent tried.
But no matter how gifted Henry's son was at countering moves,
countering was still countering, so the other wrestler always dictated the
tempo. Finally, Henry suggested to his son that he try entering a
wrestling match with his own attack plan—a series of moves that he
would initiate no matter what his opponent tried.
The boy agreed, and the results were remarkable. He began winning
match after match, pinning opponent after opponent.
The young wrestler's goal had always been to win. He didn't have a
problem setting goals. But what had to be added was a plan of action. In
sports, as in life, goals alone aren't always enough. As Nathaniel
Branden says, "A goal without an action plan is a daydream."
Henry Brown didn't just give that advice to his son because he bought
into it theoretically. His own Brown and Brown Chevrolet dealership
has many times been the number one Chevy dealership in the nation
because he plans his company's own yearly performance in the same
way he coached his son.
Every year he has his general manager send me the detailed videotape
that outlines the dealership's game plan for the coming year. It includes
all the department's projected earnings down to the penny. By boldly
charting such a specific course, Brown lets the market respond to him.
Once, when I asked him how his dealership got through a previous
year's nationwide automotive sales recession he said, "We decided not
to participate in it."
Before any adventure, take time to plan. Design your own plan of
attack. Don't just counter what some other
                                   page_171

Page 172
wrestler is doing. Let life respond to you. If you're making all the first
moves, you'll be surprised at how often you can pin life down.
82. Take no for a question
Don't take no for an answer. Take it for a question. Make the word no
mean this question: "Can't you be more creative than that?"
In my seminars I work with a lot of salespeople and one of the most
requested topics of discussion is "cold-calling and rejection." One of the
greatest problems salespeople, and people everywhere, face is in the
meaning they give to someone else's no. Many people hear no as an
absolute, final, and devastating personal rejection. But no can mean
anything you want it to mean.
When I graduated from college with a degree in English, I was not
overwhelmed with companies trying to hire me. Most people already
speak English. So I decided to try to get a job as a sports writer at the
daily evening paper in Tucson, Arizona, The Tucson Citizen. I had spent
four years in the army, and I hadn't done any sportswriting since high
school.
When I applied for the job, I was told that my major problem was that I
had never done any professional sportswriting before. It was the typical
situation of a company not being able to hire you because you haven't
had experience—but how can you gain experience if no one will hire
you?
My first impulse was to take no to be their final answer. After all, that's
what they said it was. But I finally decided to have no mean—"Can't
you be more creative than that?"
                                 page_172

Page 173
So I went home to think and plot my next move. The reason they
wouldn't hire me was because I had no experience. When I asked them
why that was important, they smiled and said, "We have no way of
knowing for sure whether you can write sports. Just being an English
major isn't enough."
Then it hit me. Their real problem wasn't my lack of experience—it was
their lack of knowledge. They didn't know whether I could write well
enough. So I set out to solve their problem for them. I began to write
them letters. I knew they were interviewing four other people for the
position and that they would decide within a month. Every day I wrote
a letter to the sports editor, the late Regis McAuley (an award-winning
writer in his own right, who made his reputation in Cleveland before
coming to Tucson).
My letters were long and expressive. I made them as creative and clever
as I could, commenting on the sports news of the day, and letting them
know how great a fit I thought I was for their staff.
After a month, Mr. McAuley called me and said that they had narrowed
it down to two candidates, and I was one of them. Would I come in for
a final interview? I was so excited, I nearly swallowed the phone.
When my interview was coming to an end (I was the second one in),
McAuley had one last question for me.
"Let me ask you something, Steve," he said. "If we hire you, will you
promise that you'll stop sending me those endless letters?"
I said I would stop, and then he laughed and said, "Then you're hired.
You can start Monday."
McAuley later told me that the letters did the trick.
"First of all, they showed me that you could write," he said. "And
second of all, they proved to me that you wanted the position more than
the other candidates did."
                                 page_173

Page 174
When you ask for something in professional life and it is denied to you,
imagine that the no you heard is really a question: "Can't you be more
creative than that?" Never accept no at face value. Let rejection
motivate you to get more creative.
83. Take the road to somewhere
Energy comes from purpose. If the left side of your brain tells the right
side of your brain that there's a sufficient crisis, the right side sends you
energy, sometimes superhuman energy.
That's why there's such a difference between people who set and
achieve goals all day, and people who just do whatever comes up, or
whatever they feel like doing. To one person, there is always added
purpose. To the other, there is boredom and confusion, the two greatest
robbers of energy.
Knowing what you're up to, and why you're up to it, gives you the
energy to self-motivate. Not knowing your purpose drains you of all
motivation.
We've all heard the stories of the diminutive mother who, seeing that
her small child was trapped, lifted a tremendously heavy object, such as
a car, so the child could be freed. When asked to repeat the superhuman
feat later, of course the woman couldn't do it.
Being a single father has put me in touch with the dramatic connection
between purpose and energy. If I am cooking something, for example,
and out of the corner of my eye I can see flames emerging from the
kitchen, it is amazing how fast I can move from the living room into the
kitchen. Crisis creates instant purpose, which creates instant energy.
                                  page_174

Page 175
The "He ain't heavy, he's my brother" idea is based on purpose. When
our purpose is great, so is our strength and energy.
"But, I don't know what my purpose is," a lot of people tell me, as if
someone forgot to tell them what it is. Those people may wait forever to
be told how to live and what to live for.
There can only be two reasons why you don't know your purpose: 1)
you don't talk to yourself; and 2) you don't know where purpose comes
from. (You think purpose comes from outside yourself instead of from
within.)
Purposeful people know how to go deep into their own spirit and talk to
themselves about why they exist, and what they want to do with the gift
of life.
"Only human beings have come to a point where they no longer know
why they exist," said the Lakota shaman Lame Deer. "They don't use
their brains and they have forgotten the secret knowledge of their
bodies, their senses, or their dreams."
Lame Deer is not optimistic about what the future holds for people who
live without purpose.
"They don't use the knowledge the spirit has put into every one of
them," he says. "They are not even aware of this, and so they stumble
along blindly on the road to nowhere—a paved highway that they
themselves bulldoze and make smooth so that they can get faster to the
big empty hole that they'll find at the end, waiting to swallow them up.
It's a quick, comfortable superhighway, but I know where it leads. I've
seen it. I've been there in my vision and it makes me shudder to think
about it."
Purpose can be built, strengthened, and made more inspiring every day.
We are totally responsible for our own sense of purpose. We can go
inside our own spirit
                                  page_175

Page 176
and create it, or not. The energy of our lives is wholly dependent on
how much purpose we're willing to create.
84. Go on a news fast
I first heard the phrase "news fast" from Dr. Andrew Weil, who writes
about natural medicine and spontaneous healing. Weil recommends
going on news fasts because he believes this has a healing effect on the
human system. To him, it's a genuine health issue.
My own recommendation for news fasts has to do with the psychology
of self-motivation. If you go for periods of time without listening to or
reading the news, you will notice an upswing in your optimism about
life. You'll feel a lift in energy.
"But shouldn't I stay informed?" people ask me. "Aren't I being a bad
citizen if I don't keep up with what's happening in my community?
Shouldn't I be watching the news?"
In answer to this question, I offer an observation that may startle you:
The news is no longer the news.
It used to be that Walter Cronkite would end his program by saying,
"And that's the way it is." And we trusted that he was right. But today,
it's much different. Shock value has the highest premium of all for a
news story, and the lines are now blurred between the evening news and
the grossest tabloids. Tom Brokaw is as likely to lead his show with a
story about a woman cutting off her husband's private parts as is The
National Enquirer.
Today, the goal of the person putting the evening news show together is
to stimulate our emotions in as many ways as possible. Every night we
will see human suffering. We will also see con artists, and even whole
                                 page_176

Page 177
companies getting away with scams that victimize people cruelly. If
there's a report on politics, it features the most venomous attacks
between two partisans.
The goal of the news today is stimulation. It's to take us on an emotional
roller-coaster ride. It's a "good" program if we have been enraged by
one story, saddened by another, and amused by at the third.
Is it any wonder that by programming our minds with this gross and
frightening information all day and into the night, we end up a little less
motivated? Is it hard to understand a certain slippage in our optimism?
Going on a news fast is a refreshing cure for this problem. You can do it
for one day a week, to begin with, and then get back into the tabloid
shows the next day if you have to. Once you start fasting, you'll find
your entire mood picking up.
"But what about staying informed?" you ask. There are many ways to
stay fully informed. The Internet has wonderful, thoughtful sites. In
fact, it is far better to be informed intellectually than to be informed
emotionally. There are weekly and monthly magazines as well as e-zines
that do a fine job of informing us and giving us a calm, thoughtful,
overall perspective of the news.
Don't worry about missing out on important news. Really big news, like
a war, a natural disaster, or an assassination will get to you just as
quickly during a news fast as it would if you were watching the news.
Begin to experiment with news fasts today. Go on a short one at first,
and then extend the periods of time as your system allows. When you
do return to the news, be totally conscious of just what the show is
trying to do to you. Don't passively take it in as if what you are seeing is
really "the way it is." It's not. They're not going to tell you how many
thousands of planes landed safely today.
                                   page_177

Page 178
85. Replace worry with action
Don't worry. Or rather, don't just worry. Let worry change into action.
When you find yourself worrying about something, ask yourself the
action question, "What can I do about this right now?"
And then do something. Anything. Any small thing.
Most of my life, I spent my time asking myself the wrong question
every time I worried. I asked myself, "What should I be feeling about
this?" I finally discovered that I was much happier when I started
asking, instead, "What can I do about this?"
If I am worried about the conversation I had with my wife last night,
and how unfair I might have been to say the things I said, I can ask
myself, "What can I do about that right now?"
By putting the question into the action arena, a lot of possibilities will
occur to me: 1) I could send her flowers; or 2) I could call her to tell her
I was concerned about how I left things; or 3) I could leave a nice little
note somewhere for her; or 4) I could go see her to make things right.
All of these possibilities are actions, and when I act on something, the
worry goes away.
We often hear the phrase "worry it to death." But that phrase doesn't
reflect what really happens when we worry. It would be great if we
could worry something to death. When it dies, we could dispose of the
body and be done with it.
But when we worry, we don't worry a thing to death, we worry it to life.
Our worrying makes the problem grow. And most of the time, we worry
it into a grotesque kind of life, a kind of Frankenstein's monster that
frightens us beyond all reason.
I once came up with a system for action that helped turn my worrying
habits completely around. I would list
                                   page_178

Page 179
the five things that I was worried about—perhaps they were four
projects at work and the fifth was my son's trouble he was having with a
certain teacher. I would then decide to spend five minutes on each
problem doing something, anything. By deciding this, I knew I was
committing myself to 25 minutes of activity. No more. So it didn't feel at
all overwhelming.
Then I could make a game of it. On project one, a seminar workbook
deadline for a new course, I'd spend five minutes writing it. Maybe I
only got the first two pages done, but it felt great. It felt like I'd finally
started it.
Then on item number two, a meeting I knew I had to have with a client
over a sticky contract issue, I would call his office and schedule the
meeting and put it in my calendar. That, too, felt good.
My third worry, a stack of correspondence I needed to answer, I would
take five minutes sorting and stacking and putting them into a folder
that was separate from the other clutter on my desk. That felt satisfying,
too. The fourth item was a travel arrangement that had to be worked
out. I'd take no more than five minutes looking at my calendar and
leaving a voice mail for my travel agent to fax me some alternatives on
the trip.
Finally, on the matter of my son, I would pull out a piece of paper and
write a short letter to his teacher expressing my concern for him, my
support of her efforts, and my desire to arrange a meeting quickly, so all
three of us could sit down together and make some agreements.
All of that took 25 minutes. And the five things that were worrying me
the most were no longer worrying me. I could then go back anytime
later and work them to completion.
If something is worrying you, always do something about it. It doesn't
have to be the big thing that will
                                  page_179

Page 180
make it disappear. It can be any small thing. But the positive effect it
will have on you will be enormous.
A friend of mine was worried about her cat, which had some mild
symptoms of illness, but nothing that looked severe enough to take the
cat to the veterinarian. She also thought the symptoms were so subtle
that they might not be easy to describe to the vet, but still she worried.
She brought the subject up two or three more times before I finally said
to her, "You must do something."
"That's just the problem, there's nothing to do," she said.
"Take some kind of action," I said. "Call the vet and talk to him."
"That doesn't make sense because the vet wouldn't know anything from
what I told him, and he'd probably ask me to take her in to see him, and
I know it's not that serious," she said.
"Yes, I understand," I said, "But you should take the action for you, not
for the cat or the vet. By not doing anything you're keeping yourself
trapped in worrying."
"Okay," she said. "I see what you mean."
When she called the vet, to her surprise, the vet was able to make a
good assessment of what was wrong. He recommended that she bring
the cat in, and if it was what he thought it was, he could give her
something to clear it up right away.
Anything that worries you should be acted on, not just thought about.
Don't be scared about the action; you can make it very small and easy,
as long as you take an action. Even small actions will chase away your
fears. Fear has a hard time coexisting with action. When there's action,
there's no fear. When there's fear, there's no action.
                                 page_180

Page 181
The next time you're worried about something, ask yourself, "What
small thing can I do right now?" Then do it. Remember not to ask,
"What could I possibly do to make this whole thing go away?" That
question does not get you into action at all.
Acting on your worries frees you up for other things. It removes fear
and uncertainty from your life and puts you back in control of creating
what you want. Just do it.
86. Run with the thinkers
The president of a major office equipment company put his problem to
me this way: "How do I get the whiners in my company to stop whining
and start coming up with solutions?"
He went on to explain that he had two kinds of people working for him,
the Whiners and the Thinkers.
The Whiners were often very smart and dedicated employees who
worked long, hard hours. But when they came into the manager's office,
it was almost always to complain.
"They're great at finding fault with other managers and telling me what's
wrong with our systems," the president said, "but they are a drain on me
because they're so negative that I end up trying to make them feel
better. After that, I'm depressed."
The Thinkers, on the other hand, had a different way of coming into the
office with problems.
"The Thinkers come to me with ideas," he said. "They see the same
problems that the Whiners see, but they've already thought about
possible solutions."
The Thinkers, in other words, have assumed ownership of the company,
and are creating the future of the company with their thinking. The
Whiners have stopped
                                 page_181

Page 182
thinking. Once the problems are identified, and their reaction to them
justified, the thinking stops.
The Thinkers have taken their reaction to the company's problems past
their emotions, and into their minds. And because they have formulated
some solutions, the nature of their meeting with the manager is creative.
It's a brainstorming meeting. The manager enjoys these meetings
because they stimulate his mind, too. Both parties leave the meeting
feeling energized intellectually, and the manager looks forward to future
meetings with the Thinkers.
The Whiners have left their reaction to their company's problems down
at the emotional level. They express resentment, fear, and worry. The
manager's problem in such a meeting is that he deals primarily with
those emotions, so he finishes the meeting with his own sense of
discouragement.
When you are committed to self-motivation as a way of life, you will
fall into the realm of the Thinker. Your thinking not only creates your
motivation, but it creates your relationships, your family, and the
organization you work for as well, because they are all a part of you.
You are more valuable to your organization with this orientation to
thinking, and you're more valuable to yourself.
87. Put more enjoyment in
There is a huge difference between pleasure and enjoyment. And when
we're absolutely clear about the difference, we can grow much faster
toward a focused and energized life.
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi best describes this difference in his various
books on "flow"—the psychological
                                 page_182

Page 183
state that we get in when time disappears and we are thoroughly
engaged in what we're doing.
Csikszentmihalyi distinguishes what we do for pleasure (routine sex,
eating, drinking, etc.) from what we do for enjoyment. Enjoyment is
deeper. Enjoyment always involves the use of a skill and the facing of a
challenge. So sailing, gardening, painting, bowling, golfing, cooking, and
any such activity involving skills meeting a challenge constitute
enjoyment.
People who get clear on that difference begin to put more enjoyment
into their lives. They reach the happy and fulfilled psychological state
known as "flow." Increasing their skills and seeking challenges to
engage those skills are what lead to an enjoyable life.
There are many stories and accounts about the winners of lotteries who
are jubilant when they win, but whose lives descend into a nightmare
after acquiring that unearned money. (No challenge, no skill.) The
lottery looks like "the answer" to people because they associate money
with pleasure. But the true enjoyment of money comes in part from the
earning of it, which involves skill and challenge.
Watching television is usually done for pleasure. That's why so few
people can remember (or make use of) any of the 30 hours of television
they have watched in the past week. In watching television, there is no
combination of skill and challenge.
Contrast that dull pleasure hangover we get from watching television
with what happens when we spend the same amount of time preparing
for a big Thanksgiving dinner for friends and relatives. In looking back,
we remember quite vividly the entire Thanksgiving endeavor.
One of the most inspirational people I know of is Martha Stewart. She
personifies mastery of the concept
                                 page_183

Page 184
of enjoyment. Her magazines and videotapes celebrate cooking,
gardening, and home entertainment skills. Her own contagious
enthusiasm for the things she enjoys and teaches others makes her, in
my opinion, one of today's true heroes of optimism. If you're feeling like
you have forgotten how to enjoy your own home, yard, and kitchen,
buy one of her videotapes and allow her to inspire you.
You can increase your own self-motivation by learning to be more
aware of the profound difference between enjoyment and mere
pleasure.
88. Keep walking
Ever since I was a child, I had a recurring dream that I began each day
facing a mattress. The more I pushed into this mattress before my day
began, the more the indentation went in, and the more saved-up the
sprung energy of the mattress got. The more the mattress was indented
with my pushing at the start of the day, the higher it would spring up
when I lay down on it to sleep at night.
I would lie down on this mattress at night and see how high my dreams
would fly me. How high I flew would always depend on the
indentations I gave the mattress during the day. The impressions I gave
it. How impressive I was. The difference I made.
So then after thinking about that dream the other day I decided to step
up my walking. I decided that the recurring dream was the way my
subconscious chose to tell me something vital. Something about the
difference walking made. Something about oxygen being pushed into
my system.
Walking would be an action I could take while wide-awake. Walking
would drive more oxygen into my lungs.
                                page_184

Page 185
I would become more like the great football coach Amos Alonzo Stagg,
who lived to be 103 years old. Amos Alonzo Stagg was asked how he
lived to be so old (the average life expectancy during his lifetime was
65) and he said, "I have, for the greater part of my life, indulged in
running and other vigorous exercise that forced large amounts of
oxygen into my body."
I increased my walking just to see what would happen if my lungs
became my mattress. I began to get happier. I began to enjoy life more.
I began to be more motivated.
As I walked, I wondered: What if the spirit lives as an aura around us?
What if the spirit were a cloud of energy that exists around and outside
our bodies ready at all times to be breathed in? Drawn right into the
soul?
What if when you breathed deeply, you pulled in your own spirit? And
you received energy for action—energy for an explosive take-down of
one of your out-of-control problems.
What if the solution to problems outside you was inside you?
Deepak Chopra quotes an ancient anonymous Indian sage as identifying
humanity's near-fatal superstition: "You believe that you live in the
universe when in reality the universe lives in you."
Many modern scientific books are now referring to the human brain as
the "three-pound universe." When the body moves, so does the mind.
So does that inner world. When you're walking, you are organizing your
mind whether you want to be or not.
Soon we realize that the mind and the body are connected. When the
Greeks said the secret to a happy life was a sound mind in a sound
body, they were on to a powerful truth.
                                 page_185

Page 186
I try to talk myself out of that truth many times a week. I'm too tired to
exercise. I have an injury. I haven't had enough sleep. I should listen to
my body! I would be short-changing my children of the important time
they need with me if I selfishly went out for my long walk.
But I am always better off if I choose the walk. I am even better at
relating to my children, because walking takes me to the soul.
That's why I can't leave it out. I can't pretend it has nothing to do with
this subject, because it's how I pull the truth to me. I pull the globe
around toward me under my feet by walking. As the world turns, the
lies leak out of my mind, into space. As the body becomes sound, so
does the mind. It's true.
And the songs in my head keep the rhythm of the walk going: Fats
Domino. Ricky Nelson. Ten Years After. I'm walkin'. Yes indeed. I'm
goin' home.
There is something about walking that combines opposites. Opposites:
activity and relaxation. (This very paradox is what creates whole-brain
thinking.) Opposites: out in the world and solitude. (Alone, but out there
walking.)
This combining of opposites activates the harmony I need between the
right and left brain, between the adult and the child, between the higher
self and the animal. Great solutions appear. Truth becomes beauty.
You have your own walking available to you, too. Yes indeed. It might
be dancing or swimming or running or racquetball or boxing or aerobics,
but it's all the same thing. It's all a way of moving the body around like a
merry plaything and oxygenating the spirit in the process.
89. Read more mysteries
My great friend and editor Kathy Eimers, to whom I first dedicated this
book, and later married, has always
                                    page_186

Page 187
been a devoted reader of mystery novels. When I first met her, I
thought, "How curious that someone so intelligent would be reading
mystery novels all the time."
It was especially interesting to me because Kathy is one of the most
literate people I'd ever met, a quick thinker and a skilled professional
writer and editor. Her editing of my books had been the one thing, in my
opinion, that gave them the sparkle that people said they enjoyed.
In my own ignorance, I assumed mystery novels were pretty light fare.
Hardly a challenge to the human mind. Now I've begun to change my
mind. Not only am I peeking into some of the mystery books she has
recommended (I've enjoyed Agatha Christie and Colin Dexter), but I've
begun to find out more about what good mystery does to the intellectual
energy of the human mind.
Kathy has one of the most creative and energetic problem-solving minds
I've ever encountered. I constantly marvel at her mental energy and
perception because it stays clear and sharp—all day, and long into the
night. I would often find my own mental acuity descending the
evolutionary ladder as night approached, while hers stayed alive and
creative.
The person with the highest IQ ever measured—Marilyn Vos Savant
—recommends mystery novels as brain builders.
"Not only is this exercise fun, but it's good for you," she says. "I'm not
talking about violent thrillers, or police procedural novels, but instead
I'm directing you to those elegant, clue-filled, intelligent mysteries
solved by drawing conclusions, not guns."
Vos Savant sees the reading of mysteries as something that leads to a
stronger intelligence.
"If you try to keep one step ahead of the detective in an Agatha Christie
or a Josephine Tey or a P.D. James
                                  page_187

Page 188
mystery novel, it will sharpen your intuition," she writes in Brain
Building. "The Sherlock Holmes stories by Arthur Conan Doyle never
go out of favor, and rightly so. Holmes's methods are brain-builders
brought to life."
When people think of personal transformation, they don't normally
think they can strengthen their own intelligence. IQ is something our
cultural attitudes have always said we're born with and stuck with. But
Vos Savant, whose IQ was measured at 230 (the average adult IQ is
100), believes strongly that the brain can be built as surely and as
quickly as the muscles of the body.
So the next time you feel like curling up with a good mystery, don't feel
guilty or nonproductive. It might be the most productive thing you've
done all day.
90. Think your way up
In some of my seminars I like to draw a picture of a ladder on the board
and call it "the ladder of selves."
On the very bottom I write "The Physical," in the middle I put "The
Emotional," and at the top I place "The Mind." We can move up or
down this ladder by the sheer force of will, although most people don't
know they have that option.
By traveling up the ladder, past the physical, through the emotional, and
into your mind, you have the opportunity to be creative and thoughtful.
You can see possibilities.
Many of us, however, never get past the emotional section of the
ladder. When we're stuck there, we begin thinking with our feelings
instead of thinking with our minds.
If you hurt my feelings, and I'm angry and resentful, I might give you a
long and eloquent speech about what's
                                  page_188

Page 189
wrong with you and how you operate. But, because I'm thinking with
my feelings instead of my mind, I'm destroying something with my
speech instead of creating an understanding.
People do this without knowing it. They let their emotions speak for
them, instead of their thoughts. So what you hear is fear, anger, sadness,
or other emotions put to words, but never creating anything.
If you can picture this ladder inside of you, and start to notice that you
are letting your feelings do your thinking and speaking, you can move
up. You can get creative and really think and then speak. As Emmet
Fox says, "Love is always creative and fear is always destructive."
Go ahead and feel your feelings. But when it's time to talk, let your
mind into the conversation. Your mind is what motivates you to your
highest performance, not your feelings.
91. Exploit your weakness
Make a list of your strengths and your weaknesses on separate pieces of
paper. Place the list of strengths somewhere where you'll see it again,
because it will always pick you up.
Now look at your list of weaknesses and study them for a while. Stay
with them until you feel no shame or guilt about them. Allow them to
become interesting characteristics, instead of negative traits. Ask
yourself how each characteristic could be useful to you. That's not what
we usually ask about our weaknesses, but that's my whole point.
When I was a boy I remember watching a remarkable tap dancer by the
name of "Peg Leg Bates" on the Ed Sullivan show. Bates had lost his
leg early in life, a
                                 page_189

Page 190
circumstance that would lead most people to give up any dreams of
becoming a professional dancer.
But to Bates, losing a leg was not a weakness for long. He made it his
strength. He put a tap at the bottom of his peg leg and developed an
amazing syncopated tap-dancing style. Obviously, he stood apart from
other dancers in auditions, and it wasn't long before his weakness
became his strength.
Master fund-raiser Michael Bassoff has dazzled the development world
by turning unappreciated staff members into great fund-raisers. He, too,
likes people's weaknesses, because he knows that they can be turned
into strengths. If there is a "shy" secretary in the development office
he's working with, he turns that person into the staff's "best listener."
Soon donors can't wait to talk to that person because she listens so well
and makes people feel so important.
When Arnold Schwarzenegger became a professional actor, he had a
weakness: his thick Austrian accent. It wasn't long, however, before
Arnold incorporated his accent into the charm of his action-hero
personality on the screen, and a former weakness became a strength.
His accent became an identifying part of his character, and people
everywhere began imitating it.
One of my weaknesses early in life was my difficulty in talking to
people. I had no confidence in my ability to speak and converse, so I
got in the habit of writing people letters and notes. After a while I got so
practiced with it that I turned it into a strength. My letter writing and
thank-you notes have created many relationships for me that would not
have been created if I'd just focused on my shyness as a weakness.
I have four children, but I didn't begin having children until I was 35
years old. For a long time I saw myself as being "older than normal" to
be a father. I worried
                                  page_190

Page 191
about it. I wondered if my son or daughters would be uncomfortable
with a father so old. And then I realized that this didn't have to be a
weakness. I thought about who I was when I was 25, and what a
difficult time I would have had being a good father back then. Soon I
took this "weakness" to be a great strength.
Then one day while watching The Little Mermaid with my kids, I saw
myself as the father in that movie—vigorous, strong, and wise, with
flowing white hair. It was the perfect image. I now see my age as a
major strength in raising my kids. The only "weakness" was in the way I
was looking at it.
There isn't anything on your weakness list that can't be a strength for
you if you think about it long enough. The problem is, our weaknesses
embarrass us. But embarrassment is not real thinking. Once we really
start thinking about our weaknesses they can become strengths, and
creative possibilities emerge.
92. Try becoming the problem
Whatever type of problem you are facing, the most self-motivational
exercise I know of is to immediately say to yourself, "I am the
problem."
Because once you see yourself as the problem, you can see yourself as
the solution.
This insight was dramatically described by James Belasco in Flight of
the Buffalo.
"This is the insight I realized early and return to often," he wrote, "In
most situations, I am the problem. My mentalities, my pictures, my
expectations, form the biggest obstacle to my success."
By seeing ourselves as victims of our problems, we lose the power to
solve them. We shut down creativity
                                page_191

Page 192
when we declare the source of the trouble to be outside of us. However,
once we say, "I am the problem," there is great power that shifts from
the outside to the inside. Now we can become the solution.
You can use this process the same way a detective uses a premise to
clarify the crime scene. If the detective says, "What if there were two
murderers, not one?" she can then think in a way that reveals new
possibilities. She doesn't have to prove that there were two murderers in
order to think the problem through as if there were. The same is true
when you become willing always to see yourself as the problem. It is
simply a way to think.
Unfortunately, our society today is in the habit of thinking the opposite
of "I am the problem." Time magazine even ran a cover story called "A
Nation of Finger Pointers," that made a powerful and persuasive case
for the fact that we have become a nation of victims who "see the
American dream not as striving fulfilled, but as unachieved
entitlement."
In The Six Pillars of Self-Esteem, Nathaniel Branden writes, "To feel
competent to live and worthy of happiness, I need to experience a sense
of control over my existence. This requires that I be willing to take
responsibility for my actions and the attainment of my goals. This means
that I take responsibility for my life and my well-being."
Before I had realized the full power of a self-motivated life, I spent a lot
of years pointing fingers. If I didn't have enough money, it was
somebody else's fault. Even my perceived personality flaws were
somebody else's fault. "I was never taught that!" I would shout in
exasperation. "No one showed me early in life how to be
self-sufficient!" was a complaint I voiced often.
                                  page_192

Page 193
But I was avoiding a basic truth: I was the problem. The reason I fought
so hard to avoid that truth was that I never realized it contained good
news. I thought it looked entirely shameful and negative. But once I
discovered that accepting responsibility for the problem also gave me
new power for solving it, I became free.
93. Enlarge your objective
Here is another self-motivator that also must be used as an intellectual
tool only.
Take a certain goal of yours and double it. Or triple it. Or multiply it by
10. And then ask yourself, quite seriously, what you would have to do
to achieve that new goal.
I used this game recently with a friend who holds a position in sales. He
came to see me because he was selling $100,000 worth of product each
month, the most on his team, and wanted to somehow get to $140,000.
I asked him to tell me what it would take for him to sell $200,000 worth
of equipment each month. "$200,000!" he shouted. "That's impossible.
I'm leading the team already with $100,000, and nobody thought that
could be done."
"What would you have to do?" I persisted.
"No," he said. "You don't understand. I want to hit $140,000 a month,
and even that is so hard I don't know how I'll do it."
I finally told him the theory behind this game.
If you seriously look at an outrageous goal, such as "$200,000," it will
open things up for you creatively that wouldn't have opened up if you
stayed looking at $140,000. He nodded slowly and reluctantly agreed to
play along for a while.
                                 page_193

Page 194
"Okay," he said. "But remember, we're talking about something that's
impossible."
"Fine," I said. "But if your life depended on hitting $200,000 next
month, what exactly would you do?"
He laughed and then started listing things as I wrote them down on a flip
pad. After he got through the ridiculous ideas, like stealing other
peoples' accounts and cooking the books, he began to think of more
ideas. At first it was hard.
"I'd have to be two places at once," he said. "I'd have to make twice as
many presentations as I'm making. I'd have to present to two clients at
once!"
Then it hit him. All of a sudden he got the idea that he might be able to
stage a large presentation of his product with a number of clients in the
room at one time. "I could rent a room at a hotel and have 20 people in
for coffee and donuts, and I could make a big deal out of it," he said.
A number of other ideas came to him—ways to combine his cold-calling
with his travel time, ways to utilize e-mail as a sales tool, how to use the
administrative staff better, and ways to expand his contracts so that
they would cover longer periods of time for a higher original fee, but at
a lower overall rate. Idea after idea came to him while I wrote furiously
on the pad.
All of the ideas were a result of his thinking big—"How would I sell
$200,000 if I absolutely had to?"
He surpassed his goal of $140,000 the very next month!
I've often used this method for self-motivation with myself. If I have a
goal of signing two seminar contracts in the next three weeks, I'll often
get out a pad of paper and ask, "How would I get 10 contracts signed in
three weeks?"
                                page_194

Page 195
Inflating my goal puts me at a different level of thinking, and because
I'm solving the problem of 10, I always get at least two.
If you want to really get some fresh motivational ideas, try expanding
your goal. Blow it up until it scares you. Then proceed in your thinking
as if it's a must that you achieve it. Remember that this is just a
self-contained game, not a promise to anyone else. But it's a game that's
fun to play because it works.
94. Give yourself flying lessons
We need heroes in our lives. They are not a sign of weakness; they are a
source of strength. "Without heroes," said Bernard Malamud, "we are
all plain people and we don't know how far we can go."
Heroes show us what's possible for a human being to accomplish.
Therefore, heroes are very useful to anyone who is in the process of
finally understanding self-motivation. But unless we consciously select
our heroes in order to use them as inspiration, we simply end up envying
great people instead of emulating them.
When used properly, a hero can be an enriching source of energy and
inspiration. You don't have to have just one hero, either. Choose a
number of them. Put their pictures up. Become an expert on their lives.
Collect books about them.
My youngest sister, Cindy, as a shy little girl, always admired Amelia
Earhardt. Not long ago, after she had reached her 30s, she revealed to
me that she had been taking flying lessons. I was stunned! A few weeks
after that, the family went out to a little airport outside of town to watch
her fly her first solo. "I was so scared," said Cindy, "that my mouth and
throat went completely dry."
                                   page_195

Page 196
Flying has nothing to do with what Cindy does for a living—she just
took lessons and learned to pilot a plane because of the impression that
her hero, Amelia Earhardt, made on her as a little girl.
"We grow into that which we admire," said Emmet Fox.
Before he became a famous author, Napoleon Hill was struggling as a
writer and speaker. He had a friend whose restaurant business was not
doing well and Hill offered to give free motivational speeches at the
restaurant one night a week to help his friend increase his business. The
speeches helped his friend a little, but they helped Hill a lot. He began
to gain a large following.
When I read about that part of Hill's life, it gave me an idea. At the time
I wanted to be a full-time speaker and I didn't know where to begin. I'd
done a few seminars and talks here and there, but there was no pattern
or purposeful direction to it. I decided to emulate Hill. I began putting
on a free, open-to-the-public workshop every Thursday night at the
company where I was working as a marketing director.
At first, the workshops were not well attended. I had to spend part of
the week begging people to come. Once the audience was two people!
But week by week the workshop's reputation grew and my own
experience grew along with it. Soon we had large audiences waiting to
get in on Thursday nights, and I credit that little free workshop with
putting me into full-time public speaking.
Was it an original idea? No, I stole it. I copied a hero of mine. But our
awareness of the choice involving heroes is vital for self-creation. We
can envy them or we can emulate them.
                                  page_196

Page 197
The best use of heroes is not to just be in awe of them, but to learn
something from them. To let their lives inspire us. They are only people
like we are. What distinguishes them from us is the great levels they've
reached in self-motivation. To passively adore them is to insult our own
potential. Instead of looking up to our heroes, it is much more beneficial
to look into them.
95. Hold your vision accountable
"It's not what a vision is," says Robert Fritz "it's what a vision does."
What does your vision do? Does it give you energy? Does it make you
smile? Does it get you up in the morning? When you're tired, does it
take you that extra mile? A vision should be judged by these criteria, the
criteria of power and effectiveness. What does it do?
Robert Fritz is widely quoted in Peter Senge's business masterpiece, The
Fifth Discipline. Fritz is a former musician who has taken the basic
principles of creativity in music composition and applied them to
creating successful professional lives. Life gets good, he argues, when
we get clear on what we want to create.
Most people spend most of their waking hours trying to make problems
go away. This lifelong crusade to solve one's problems is a negative and
reactive existence. It sells us short and leaves us at the end of life (or at
the end of the day) with, at best, the double-negative feeling of "fewer
problems"!
"There is a profound difference between problem solving and creating,"
Fritz points out in The Path of Least Resistance.
"Problem solving is taking action to have something go away—the
problem. Creating is taking action to have something come into
being—the creation. Most of us
                                page_197

Page 198
have been raised in a tradition of problem-solving and have little real
exposure to the creative process."
Step one in the creative process is having a vision of what you want to
create. Without this vision, there is no way to create. Without this
vision, you are only problem-eliminating, which is a double negative. It's
impossible to feel positive about a life based on a double negative.
So the way to alter your thinking is to notice when you're drifting into,
"What do I want to get rid of?" and mentally replace that thinking with,
"What do I want to bring into being?"
When Fritz says that we have been "raised in a tradition" of problem
solving, he is almost understating it. We are programmed and wired to
think that way every day. Notice the thinking of people as they
approach a challenge (even a challenge as small as an upcoming
meeting with other people):
"Here's what I hope doesn't happen," one will say. "Well, here's how
you can avoid that," someone else will helpfully say. "The only problem
we have is this," a third person will say, attempting to make the meeting
seem less frightening.
Notice that nowhere was there the question, "What would we like to
bring into being as a result of this meeting?"
Whether the situation is as small as a meeting or as large as your whole
life, the most useful question you can ask yourself is, "What do I want
to bring into being?"
It's a beautiful question, because it makes no reference to problems or
obstacles. It implies pure creativity. It puts you back on the positive side
of life.
My friend Steve Hardison made an observation about self-motivation
that I have always remembered and agreed with.
                                 page_198

Page 199
"It's just one thought," he said. "Motivational teachers repeat it many
different ways, but it's just one thought: It's a binary system. Are you on
or are you off?"
Are you positive or are you negative? Are you creating or are you
reacting? Are you on or are you off? Are you life or are you death? Are
you day or are you night? Are you in or are you out? "Is you is or is you
ain't?"
And there's nothing more motivational to flip your binary switch to "on"
than a clear vision of what it is that you really want. What do you want
to bring into being? It doesn't matter what that vision is or how often it
changes. It only matters what that vision does.
If your vision isn't getting you up in the morning, then make up another
one. Keep at it until you develop a vision that's so colorful and clear
that it puts you in action just to think about it.
96. Build your power base
Knowledge is power. What you know is your power base—it's the
battery you run on. You need to charge it constantly and consciously.
Who do you want to be in charge of what you know? News directors?
Radio disc jockeys? The office gossip? Tabloid newspaper editors? A
pessimistic family member?
Unless we consciously decide to build our own knowledge base, with a
sense of direction to it, then we will be programmed, totally, by random
input.
Feeling miserable and alienated from life is caused by not being in
control of what we know.
"Misery and alienation are not laid upon us by fate," wrote Colin
Wilson. "They are due to the failure of the ego to accept its role as the
controller of consciousness. All our experiences of happiness and
intensity force the
                                  page_199

Page 200
same conviction upon us, for they involve a sense of mastery."
You can be the master of your own fate. You can make choices all day
long about what you are going to learn and what you are not going to
learn.
"What are you reading over there?" someone may ask you. "Oh, it's just
something I found in the trash," you might say.
And it might seem harmless enough to read something you found in the
wastebasket because there was nothing else nearby, but whole lives are
shaped that way. The computer term "GIGO"—garbage in, garbage
out—is even truer for the human biocomputer than it is for mechanical
computers.
Take control of what you know. The more you know about what
motivates you, the easier it is to motivate yourself. The more you know
about the human brain, the less trouble you have operating it.
Knowledge is power. Respect yours and build on it.
97. Connect truth to beauty
I hate reading motivational material that thunders at me about the
importance of integrity and honesty for their own sake. Somehow, that
always seems to turn me off, because the writers come off like angry
preachers and teachers. Hardly inspiring.
I'm always inspired better by things that are made to look interesting
and fun. I'm always taken in by a promise of life being more beautiful
and rarely taken in by a promise of a life being more righteous and
proper.
To me, the best case to make for honesty is how beautiful it is...how
clean and clear it makes the journey from current reality to the dream.
                                page_200

Page 201
When people know exactly where they are, they can go somewhere
from there. But being "lost" is a function of dishonesty. And when we're
lost, or dishonest, anywhere we go from there is wrong. When we start
with a false reading, there's no direction home.
Like Bob Dylan's rolling stone, we don't know who we are. We feel, at
the core, "like a complete unknown."
Truth, on the other hand, is clear, complete, and compellingly vivid. It is
solid and strong, so it can hold us steady as we climb.
"Truth," said poet John Keats, "is beauty."
The more honest we are with others and ourselves about current reality,
the more energy and focus we gather. We don't have to keep track of
what we told one person or what we told another.
One of the best and most positive explanations of the beauty of personal
integrity was expressed by Nathaniel Branden in The Six Pillars of
Self-Esteem. Branden, unlike most writers on the subject, sees truth and
integrity as a positive part of the process of self-esteem. His point is not
that we owe it to other people's sense of morality to be honest, but that
we owe it to ourselves.
"One of the great self-deceptions," said Branden, "is to tell oneself,
'Only I will know.' Only I will know that I am a liar; only I will know
that I deal unethically with people who trust me; only I will know that I
have no intention of honoring my promise. The implication is that my
judgment is unimportant and that only the judgment of others counts."
Branden's writing on personal integrity is inspiring because it's directed
at creating a happier and stronger self, not at a universal appeal for
morality.
One of the ways we describe a work of art that is sloppy and unfinished
is as "a mess." The problem with
                                  page_201
Page 202
lying, or lying by omission, is that it leaves everything so
incomplete—in a mess. Truth always completes the picture—any
picture. And when a picture is complete, whole, and integrated, we see
it as "beautiful."
I'll even hear about people—usually people who you can't believe about
anything—described as "a mess." And conversely, a person who you
can always count on to be honest with you is often referred to as a
"beautiful" person. Truth and beauty become impossible to separate.
Truth leads you to a more confident level in your relationships with
others and with yourself. It diminishes fear and increases your sense of
personal mastery. Lies and half-truths will always weigh you down,
whereas truth will clear up your thinking and give you the energy and
clarity needed for self-motivation.
98. Read yourself a story
Abraham Lincoln used to drive his law partners to distraction. Every
morning he would come into his office and read the daily newspaper
aloud to himself. They would hear him in the next room reading in a
booming voice.
Why did Lincoln do his morning reading aloud? He had discovered that
he remembered and retained twice as much when he read aloud than
when he read silently. And what he did remember, he remembered for a
much longer period of time.
Perhaps it was because Lincoln was employing a second sense, the
sense of hearing, and a second activity, the activity of speaking, which
made his readings so memorable to him.
Any time you have an opportunity to read something that is important
to you, try reading it aloud and see if you don't make twice the
impression on yourself. When
                                  page_202

Page 203
you discover something you want to remember, and draw upon in the
future, read it aloud.
Steve Hardison, one of the most successful business consultants I have
ever known, credits one origin of his success to when he was a
struggling young man without money or a clue about where he wanted
to go. Then one day he came across Napoleon Hill's enormous book,
Law of Success, and read the entire volume aloud.
My favorite piece of writing to read aloud is Chapter 16 of Og
Mandino's The Greatest Salesman in the World. Here's a part of it,
which you may now read silently to yourself. However, if you want a
real shot of adrenaline to your spirit, I recommend you mark this page
and when you're alone, read it aloud like Lincoln:
"I will act now. I will act now. I will act now. Henceforth, I will repeat
these words again and again, each hour, each day, every day, until the
words become a habit as my breathing and the actions which follow
become as instinctive as the blinking of my eyelids. With these words I
can condition my mind to perform every act necessary for my success.
With these words I can condition my mind to meet every challenge."
99. Laugh for no reason
Become a performer. Be an actor and a singer. Act like you already feel
like you want to feel. Don't wait until the feeling motivates you. It could
be a long wait.
American philosopher William James put it very clearly: "We do not
sing because we are happy, we are happy because we sing."
Most of us believe an emotion, such as happiness, comes first. Then we
do whatever we do, in reaction to that particular emotion. Not so,
insisted James. The emotion arises simultaneously with the doing of the
act. So if
                                  page_203

Page 204
you want to be enthusiastic, you can get there by acting as if you were
already enthusiastic. Sometimes it takes a minute. Sometimes it skips a
beat. But it always works if you stay with it, no matter how ridiculous
you feel doing it.
Feel ridiculous. If you want to be happy, find the happiest song you
know and sing it. It works. Not always in the first few moments, but if
you keep at it, it works. Just fake it until you make it. Soon your happy
singing will show you how much control you do have over your own
emotions.
Zen monks do a "laughing meditation" in which they all gather in a
circle and get ready to laugh. At the stroke of a certain hour the teacher
hits a gong, and all the monks begin to laugh. They have to laugh,
whether or not they feel like it. But after a few moments the laughter
becomes contagious. Soon all the monks are laughing genuinely and
heartily.
Children do this, too. They start giggling for no reason (often at the
dinner table or some other forbidden setting and the giggling itself
makes them laugh). The truth is this: Laughter itself can make you
laugh. The secret of happiness is hidden inside that last sentence.
But adults aren't always comfortable with this. Adults want kids to have
reasons for laughing. As I used to drive my children long distances to
visit relatives, I'd get most irritated when they began laughing and
giggling in the back seat without reason. I developed a backstroke swing
to curb the laughter. "Why are you laughing?" I would shout. "You have
no reason to be laughing! This is a dangerous highway and I'm trying to
drive here!"
But adults, like me, might want to get back that appreciation for joyful
spontaneity. We might want to confront the question, "What is the one
thing that most
                                page_204

Page 205
makes me feel like singing?" And then know the answer: "Singing."
What most gets you in the mood to dance? Dancing. The next time you
ask someone to dance, and they say, "I don't feel like dancing," you
might reply, "That's because you're not dancing."
100. Walk with love and death
"I am a coward."
That was how the book began. It was a novel I was reading not long
after I had graduated from high school, and those first words staggered
me. I remember staring at those words, unable to continue reading, I
was so stunned. Never has a book connected with me so quickly.
For I was a coward, too. It's just that I never admitted it so openly as did
the author of A Walk with Love and Death.
The author was Hans Konigsberger, and the book was a medieval love
story later made into a movie by John Huston, but none of that
mattered. What mattered was that there was another coward on the
planet other than me. Even if he was fictional, the words were real
enough for me.
My self-image at the time I read that book was based on my fears and
nothing else. In my mind, I was truly a coward. And if someone were to
tell me I'd done something brave, I'd think they were wrong somehow.
Or that they didn't know how easy that thing was.
Where did this self-image come from? I don't blame my parents,
because I believe we create our own pictures of ourselves, and I had a
choice whether to stick with this self-image or not. (After all, I could
have done what Gordon Liddy did when he was a boy—upset that he
was afraid of rats, he caught some, cooked them, and
                                 page_205

Page 206
ate them. Upset that he was afraid of thunder and lightning, he strapped
himself to the top of a large tree where he stayed for the duration during
a major electrical storm. These kinds of things I did not do.)
Although I don't blame my parents, I can trace where I got the idea of
my being a coward to their encouragement.
My mother, too, was afraid of everything. She lived to the age of 66
without ever having made a left hand turn in traffic, so afraid she was of
oncoming traffic. (She always knew how to make a looping series of
right turns to get where she was going.) She consoled me and told me
that I was just like her. A coward, I thought. She was very loving and
empathetic about it, but my self-image became unshakable. However,
my mother said she'd try to be there to help me do the many things she
knew I wouldn't be able to do.
I met my father when I was two and a half years old. He was a war
hero, home from World War II, and it is reported that when he walked
into our home and saw me for the first time, I looked up at his imposing
uniformed figure and said, "Who is that?"
"John Wayne," my mother should have said.
Because my father was afraid of nothing. He was a decorated soldier, a
star athlete, a tough and successful businessman, and the list goes on.
But he soon knew one thing about his little boy—no guts. And it was
distressing to him.
So, both parents and the child himself were all in agreement about it.
The father was upset about it, the mother understood, and the boy was
just scared.
That is possibly why, as I grew older, I discovered "false courage."
                                page_206

Page 207
I discovered—through use of an intoxicating substance—that I could be
who I wanted to be. But soon the marvelous discovery turned to
addiction, and my life revolved around my dependency on it. They were
wild times, but as anyone will tell you who's been through it, there was
no growth or fulfillment during those years. They soon became an
intolerable nightmare.
Fortunately, I recovered. It has been more than 20 years since I've had
to resort to chemically based courage. During that recovery period,
which was often difficult, I came to learn a prayer that was popular
among fellow recovering people. They called it "The Serenity Prayer"
and you've probably heard it. It goes like this: "God grant me the
serenity to accept the things I cannot change, the courage to change the
things I can and the wisdom to know the difference."
I think it was called the "serenity" prayer because that's what everyone
wanted from the prayer—serenity. Abruptly ending a long period of
substance abuse can leave you far short of serene. Although with each
passing day it gets better and better, that prayer was something to hang
on to.
But after being clean and sober started to work for me, I knew
something was still missing—I knew I needed more than serenity. My
deep-seated self-image of being a coward had not gone away, and so I
turned my attention to the second line in the prayer, "the courage to
change the things I can." In my mind, it was no longer the serenity
prayer—it had become the courage prayer.
Courage was still what I lacked, and that feeling of personal cowardice
was still my entire self-image. It shaped my whole "personality."
                                 page_207

Page 208
When my friend Mike Killebrew gave me Napoleon Hill's The Master
Key to Riches, the answer to my courage prayer began to come to me.
If I didn't have the courage inside of me, I would create it. And at that
moment, the process of self-motivation began in earnest.
I could cite you many examples of the fears I had, but to illustrate how I
overcame them, I'll use an example I referred to earlier—my fear of
public speaking. I've since learned that the fear of public speaking is not
unique to me. In fact, it's considered the number-one fear among our
population today, even greater than the fear of death.
To me, though, it was a painful manifestation of the overall deep fear
that constituted my entire personality. I laughed knowingly once when
Woody Allen said that he was "afraid of the dark and feared the light of
day." That was me.
When I finally made myself join an acting class to face my fear of
speaking, I learned to my horror that I was the only non-actor in the
class. In our first session, led by the hugely talented actress and coach
Judy Rollings, I listened as everyone in the class talked about all the
recent stage productions they had been in.
Judy gave us each a long monologue to learn and recite in the next
session. Mine was from Spoon River Anthology and my character was a
judge who had been mocked as a young man, but rose to judge those in
the community who used to make fun of him. It was a challenging
piece, and I was terrified.
I knew I had to do something harder than the recital to prepare for the
recital, so I set out to do it. I memorized my part and began to perform it
in front of people. I asked whoever would listen to sit down and watch
me recite this piece. I did it in front of my actress friend Judy LeBeau,
who had gotten me into the class. I
                                    page_208

Page 209
did it on tape and sent it to songwriter and comedian Fred Knipe. I did it
in front of my friend Kathy. I made my children sit quietly and watch
me do it over and over. Each time, I was scared, my heart was pounding
and I hyperventilated. But each time it got easier and better.
Finally the day of the class arrived. I took the day off from work to
rehearse this little three-minute piece all day. When class time arrived, I
was extremely nervous, but not deeply panicked. In my life, there's a
big and welcome difference.
Judy Rollings asked for volunteers to perform their monologues, and as
each "experienced" actor got up to do theirs, I gained confidence. I
could see that they, too, were very nervous. They were acting in front
of peers, which is sometimes harder than before a normal audience.
They were blowing their lines and, in embarrassment, asking to start
over. Some of their voices were a little shaky. I was encouraged.
Finally, with just one or two of us left to go, I volunteered and walked
slowly to the front of the room.
What happened then is something I'll never forget. As I went to the
front of the room, just before I turned around to face the teacher and
class, a voice in my mind spoke to me, and it said only one word:
Showtime.
With a surprising surge of energy, I delivered my piece. My voice
soared up and hit the dramatic points and dropped down to emphasize
the subtle lines and the parts that I gave a funny interpretation to were
drawing huge laughs from the class. When I was finished, I looked back
up and saw that the whole class had burst out clapping—something
Judy had told them not to do for anybody.
When I drove home that night, I was in heaven. I kept reciting my
monologue out loud, reveling in the
                                 page_209

Page 210
memory of their laughter and clapping. The thing I thought I feared
most in life was somehow mastered. And I repeated to myself the
principle I had used to make it happen—the more I sweat in peacetime,
the less I bleed in war.
I often look back on who I was when I first encountered the words, "I
am a coward," in A Walk With Love and Death. And I realize that today
I have something that I didn't have back then, the knowledge that
courage can be created.
I still have fears, but I no longer am fear. I no longer think of myself as
a coward. And when people compliment me on something I've done that
they think was courageous, I don't dismiss them as being crazy or
stupid.
There is a way I use to motivate myself to overcome any fear that's in
my way today. It's a way I've never told anyone about until now,
because it has a strange name. I call it "walk with love and death."
When I need to get through something, face something, or create a
courageous action plan—I take long walks. When I walk long and far
enough, a solution always appears. I eventually get oriented to the most
creative course of action.
"When you walk," writes Andrew Weil in Spontaneous Healing, "the
movement of your limbs is cross-patterned: the right leg and left arm
move forward at the same time, then the left leg and right arm. This
type of movement generates electrical activity in the brain that has a
harmonizing influence on the central nervous system—a special benefit
of walking that you do not necessarily get from other kinds of exercise."
                                page_210

Page 211
I call it "a walk with love" because love and fear are opposites. (Most
people think love and hate are opposites, but they are not.) The ultimate
creativity occurs from a spirit of love and, as Emmet Fox says, "Love is
always creative, and fear is always destructive."
I call it a "walk with death," because it is only the acceptance and
awareness of my own death that gives my life the clarity that it needs to
be exciting.
My walks often last a long time. Somehow, whatever challenge I'm
facing appears to me from many different angles as I'm walking. I know
that one of the real values is that while walking, I'm truly alone with
myself—there are no phones to answer or people to talk to. I create so
little of that kind of time in life, that it's always surprising how beneficial
it is.
Take your own challenges out for a walk. Feel your self-motivation
growing inside you, as the electricity in your brain starts to harmonize
your central nervous system. You'll soon know for a fact that you have
what it takes. You won't have to pray for the courage to change the
things you can—you will already have it.
                                    page_211

Page 212
This page intentionally left blank.
                                page_212

Page 213
Afterword
101. Teach yourself the power of negative thinking
I discovered something remarkable quite by accident one night as I was
conducting a workshop on goal achievement. I discovered the power of
negative thinking. As the people in the workshop struggled to list their
goals on a piece of paper, I ran out of patience.
"How will you get what you want if you don't know what it is?" I asked
the room, half of which still had empty sheets of paper and empty facial
expressions.
"Okay," I said, "Let's put these goals away. I want to try something
different. Take out a new sheet of paper and do this. Write down what
you don't want in your life. List every major problem and source of
discomfort you have. All your worries. All the negative things you can
think of, even if they haven't come into reality yet. Even if they are just
things you don't want to happen in the future. Take your time and be
thorough."
What I saw happen next startled me. The entire room's energy level
picked up, and everyone in the workshop was writing and writing and
writing. It wasn't
                                 page_213

Page 214
long before some people asked if they could use a second page.
Something strange and electric was filling the air as people aired their
fears and grievances. Pages were flooded with ink, and hands and
fingers had to be shaken out so people wouldn't cramp up from writing
so much. When I called an end to the exercise, the room was buzzing.
I had obviously let something loose that wasn't there before. At that
moment I got my first true look at the power of the negative. Actually, I
had seen it before. When I took the time to look back over my life, I
realized that saying no was always a stronger stand to take than saying
yes. Saying no is drawing a line in the sand. It is taking a stand. It is
putting your foot down. It is passionate. It is powerful. Compared to
saying no, saying yes is wobbly and wishy-washy. I said yes to a
thousand drinks of alcohol in my life. But it wasn't until one hung-over
suicidal morning when I said no that my life got completely turned
around. When the cave man drew the line in the dirt outside his cave
and said no to the saber-tooth tiger, his family was finally safe.
Saying no is powerful, because it comes from the deepest part of the
soul. There are some things we just won't tolerate.
Once we fully understand the power of those no's deep inside of us, we
can use them to motivate ourselves like never before.
In the workshop I was telling you about, once the people filled their
papers up with what they didn't want, we got busy converting problems
into goals. You don't want to go bankrupt? Then let's get a prosperity
plan going! You don't want to weigh as much as your two best friends
combined? Then let's get a nutrition and exercise program going! Any
no can be converted to a powerful yes.
                               page_214

Page 215
So if you're stuck without any truly motivating goals, dreams or
commitments, then go negative first. Figure out what you absolutely
don't want—what you absolutely fear and dread and refuse to let in to
your life—then convert it to its opposite, positive form and see what
happens. You'll be more motivated than you ever dreamed you could
be.
I have used this in one-on-one meetings with people who wouldn't open
up and tell me what they wanted. I simply asked them to tell me what
they didn't want to have happen and we were off to the races. Once you
know what that is, you can convert the conversation to exciting plans
and objectives. This explains why so many successful people had
difficult upbringings, sometimes living in the harshest poverty. They
connected very early to what they didn't want. The rest was clear
sailing.
The next time you lack passion when thinking of what you want, try
turning it around. Ask yourself what you absolutely don't want, and then
feel the energy building in you to overcome that problem.
That energy you're feeling is the deepest and most primal form of
motivation.
                                page_215

Page 216
This page intentionally left blank.
                                page_216

Page 217
Index
A
acting the part you want to be, 47–48
affirmations, 34–35
attitude, positive, having a, 90–91
audiobooks, 38–41
awareness, making most of, 75–76
B
Bennett, William, 72
biocomputer, 73–75, 118
Book of Virtues, The, 72
Brain Building, 29
brainstorming, 122–124
Branden, Devers, 19, 83
Burroughs, William, 15–16, 38, 41, 51, 62, 83–85, 118–119, 140–141,
155–156, 192, 201
buttons, pushing your positive, 33–34
C
challenge,
as motivator, 57–58
facing, 25–27
change, as motivator, 155–157
changing yourself, 169–170
chemicals, body, 50–51
choices and motivation, 15–16
Choosing Your Own Greatness, 40
Chopra, Deepak, 164, 185
comfort zones, 57–58
competition, 147–149
confidence, 82–85
creating a vision, 22–24
Creating Affluence, 164
creative thinking, 111–113
                                page_217

Page 218
creativity, 93–96
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 106–107, 182–183
curiosity, power of, 76–78
D
deathbed exercise, 19–21
discipline, 73
dreaming, power of, 61
dreams, turning into reality, 160–161
Dyer, Wayne, 40, 41, 88
E
energy, 174–176
F
fate, mastering your own, 200
fear, 55, 62–64, 84
fearlessness, social, 53
Fifth Discipline, The, 197
Fisher, Bobby, 131–133
five percent solution, 155–157
Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, 106–107
focus, maintaining, 24–25
Follow the Yellow Brick Road, 78
Ford, Henry, 44, 146
four-circle exercise, 143–147
Frankenstein's Castle, 38, 91
freedom, consciously noticing our, 130–131
friends, positive, surrounding yourself with, 45–47
Fritz, Robert, 197–197
G
games, as challenges, 96–98
goals, 174–176
and happiness, 90
developing, 58–59
importance of setting, 106–108
inflating your, 193–195
power, setting specific, 168–169
progressing toward, 79–82
staying focused on, 24–25
writing down your, 108–111
Goss, Tracy, 38
H
habits,
changing your, 128–130
entrapping, 139
happiness, 70–71
Hardison, Steve, 133–136, 138–139
hero, finding a, 19–194
Hill, Napoleon, 37, 41, 165, 208
                                page_218

Page 219
honesty, 200–202
I
imagination, using your, 60–61
inner voice, 133–136, 140–141
interactive listening, 66–67
J
Johnson, Jimmy, 24–25
Jordan, Michael, 147
K
Kaufman, Barry Neil, 152
Keller, Helen, 150–152
Killebrew, Mike, 36–37
Knight, Bobby, 77
Knipe, Fred, 69, 162
knowledge as power base, 199–200
Koether, Bob, 29–30, 111–112
Kolbe, Him, 30–31
L
"ladder of selves," 188–189
Last Word in Power, The, 38
laughter, 203–205
Learned Optimism, 117, 140
left brain vs. right brain, 92–93
life, simplifying your, 27–31
listening,
interactive, 66–67
reprogramming your, 73–75
lists, making, 165–168
Lombardi, Vince, 27
luck, 143
M
Master Key to Riches, The, 37, 208
McGinnis, Alan Loy, 79, 115
mind and body connection, 184–186
money, power over motivation, 164–165
motivation, 48–51, 112
easing into, 44–45
mystery novels, reading, 186–188
N
Naked Lunch, 51
negative thinking, power of, 213–215
negativity, tuning out, 73–75
news fasts, 176–177
O
optimism, 80
building, 42–44
vs. pessimism, 15
                                  page_219

Page 220
P
Path of Least Resistance, The, 197
Patton, General George, 62, 132–133
Peale, Norman Vincent, 78, 117–118
Peck, M. Scott, 137, 150
personality, 15–17, 47, 207
pessimism, 80, 119–122, 150
pessimistic thoughts,
debating, 117–119
pessimists, 116–117
planning, importance of, 170–172
pleasure vs. enjoyment, 182–184
Power of Optimism, The, 79, 115
problem, becoming the, 191–193
problems, as learning tools, 101–103
problem-solving, 162–163
vs. creating, 197–198
promise, making unreasonable, 141–142
purpose, 175–176
finding your, 85–90
R
reaction vs. action, 91–93
rejection, as motivator, 172–174
RelationSHIFT, 110
relation-shift, creating a, 78–79
relationships, 64–66
asking questions in your, 78
relaxation, active vs. passive, 98–99
risks, taking, 52–53
Road Less Traveled, The, 137
Robbins, Anthony, 41
S
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 21–22
self-confidence, 61
self-discipline, 36–38
self-esteem, 83–84
self-image, 152–153, 205–207
self-motivation rituals, 68–70
self-motivation, 31–32, 49–51, 57–58, 78–79, 103–106, 182–184, 198,
211
lack of, 157–158
Seligman, Martin, 117, 140, 150
silence, listening to, 48–50
simplifying your life, 27–31
Six Pillars of Self-Esteem, The, 38, 83, 140, 192, 201
                                 page_220

Page 221
Son Rise, 152
Spontaneous Healing, 46, 102–103, 210
Stewart, John, 69
T
television, turning off the, 56–57
They Call Me Coach, 143
thought,
connection to motivation, 113–117
power of, 181–182
Tolle, Eckhart, 38
transformation, personal, 99–101
truth, 200–202
U
unexpected, welcoming the, 35–36
unhappiness, as motivator,
V
vision, 197–199
creating a, 22–23
visioneering, 159–161
voice, inner, 140–141
listening to your, 133–136
Vos Savant, Marilyn, 29, 187
vulnerability, using your, 54–56
W
Walsh, Bill, 58–59
weakness, turning into strength, 189–191
Weil, Andrew, 46, 102–103, 176, 210
whole-brain thinking, 92–93
willpower, 71–73
developing, 67–68
Wilson, Collin, 38, 91, 139
Wooden, John, 100, 142–143,
Woods, Tiger, 133
work, planning, 41–42
worry, replacing with action, 178–181
Write from the Heart, 69
Wurman, Richard Saul, 78
                                 page_221

Page 222
This page intentionally left blank.
                                page_222
